# Acknowledgements

The road to this thesis was a long and circuitous and its completion was dependent on many of those who provided unconditional support along the way. First and foremost, my wife Janice, whose unflagging support was and remains appreciated beyond any sense of measure, and to my children Isabelle and Celeste, who grew up alongside this work and whose curiosity and generous approach to the world lightened my burdens during some darker hours. I began my academic life as a student in the mathematics department, and even managed to complete a major there, before being introduced to the wonders of history by numerous professors at the University of Toronto, among whom Ken Bartlett, Craig Fraser, Jacques Kornberg, and Konrad Eisenbichler were particularly inspiring. My foray into graduate studies, after an unexpectedly long sojourn in the business world, was supported by the encouragement and support of Nicholas Terpstra, Brendan Cook, and John McClelland. My graduate studies began at Queen’s University in Kingston, and I am indebted to the entire staff of the Department of History, who were always helpful and never hindering. The seminars led by Adnan Husain, Harold Mah, and Andrew Jainchill were crucial in forming my outlook towards the Mediterranean world, and I also benefited from discussions with Daniel Woolf, Colin Duncan, Richard Greenfield, and Ariel Salzmann. My MA advisor Anthony D’Elia provided unwavering support in my endeavors and also played a crucial role in pointing me away from Florence and towards Genoa.

My PhD studies at the University of Toronto could not have been successful without the continued support of Nicholas Terpstra, who generously offered to serve as my advisor and whose enthusiastic spirit, critical mind, and keen attention to historiographical detail was crucial to the success of this project. I will be forever in his debt. Natalie Rothman and Mark Meyerson generously agreed to serve on my PhD committee, and I am grateful for their guidance in preparing this work. Natalie was crucial in introducing new avenues of critical thinking and historiographical scholarship, while Mark provided incisive textual criticism and a reminder to never forget about Iberia. Their generosity of spirit will never be forgotten! The seminars conducted by Arthur Rigg, Paul Cohen, Melanie Newton, and Nicholas Everett provided the foundations for thinking carefully about argumentation and historiography which was crucial to the successful completion of my comprehensive examinations. Additional thanks go out to Laurel MacDowell for imparting her expertise in environmental history and to Lawrin Armstrong for his service on my examination committee. The stimulating discourse with my fellow PhD students was also crucial to this endeavor. I am particularly thankful for discussions with Edward Adamo, Abdullah Farooqi, Allison Graham, Stephanie Cavanaugh, Mehmet Kuru, Kristina Francescutti, Bogdan Smarandache, Kari North, Lara Howerton, Sarah Reeser, Lindsay Sidders, John Christopolous, Adriana Ellis, Sprit Waite, Hana Suckstorff, Julia Rombough, Justine Walden, and Eric Pecile. Much gratitude is also due to professors Ken Bartlett, Shami Ghosh, Nicholas Terpstra, Paul Cohen, and Clare Dale for their guidance and mentorship when serving as a teaching assistant in their courses. My external examiners Debra Blumenthal and Paul Cohen also deserve credit for their close reading and detailed commentary on this thesis within a very constricted timespan. A special thanks is also due to the Interlibrary Loan Office at Robarts Library, who were able to procure many crucial studies that were not available in Canada.

The research for this thesis was undertaken over three summers in the city of Genoa and was funded by grants from the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada, the School of Graduate Studies at the University of Toronto, and the Renaissance Society of America. The patience of the knowledgeable staff of the Archivio di Stato di Genova with this newcomer to archival research will be forever appreciated. The assistance and guidance of Guistina Olgiati, Daniele Tinterri, Padraic Rohan, and Valentina Ruzzin in Genoa was also crucial in navigating the complex archival system. The discussions at various conferences with Roberto Zaugg, Dru Swadener, Beth Pettijean, Philip Gavitt, Carrie Benes, Francesco Guidi Bruscoli, and Kathryn Reyerson, among numerous others, helped to further focus my research and analysis. A special and insurmountable thank you goes out to Carlo Taviani, who has provided crucial assistance in navigating the Genoese archival system, delineating the economic history of the Genoese Mediterranean world, and whose friendship and unwavering support ultimately made this thesis possible.