# Part II. Networks of slaveholding in the late medieval Genoese Mediterranean

This section consists of a series of five chapters that will reconstruct the social, economic, and geographical networks of slaveholding in the late medieval Genoese Mediterranean. The narrative will focus on the market economy of slavery in Genoa and the networks that were instantiated and consolidated by its economic activities.[[1\]](#_ftn1) The careful identification of slaveholders as well as those who enacted, participated in, and were witness to the relevant contracts will serve to reconstruct these complex and entangled urban networks of perpetrators, bystanders, and victims. These networks will offer insights into the legal and financial structures that supported this system of enslavement, illuminate the patterns of slaveholding and participation, and reveal the systematic economic exploitation of enslaved bodies by merchant elites. This exploitation occurred across the life cycle of enslavement and was structured to allow for a continuous stream of capital accumulation from enslaved persons. This analysis will also call into question the traditional narratives and assumptions regarding slavery in late medieval Italy. These narratives and assumptions have largely framed this system as an unique form of urban domestic slavery, an interregnum in the world history of slavery that was somewhat more benign and less exploitative than the better-known historical systems that preceded and superseded it, namely the Ancient Roman and early modern Atlantic slave systems.[[2\]](#_ftn2) This analysis will instead demonstrate a carefully and deliberately constructed system that was not just situated in the supposedly refined households of urban elites, but one that was integrated into all aspects of Genoese urban society, from artisanal workshops, to monasteries, to the busy warehouses of the ports, to notarial tables, and urban public spaces. This system was far from benign. It was predicated on the continuous and unremitting exploitation of the enslaved using recently revived Roman law to develop novel legal and financial structures that served to buttress and systematize the market economy of slavery. This systematization was a principal component of early modern capitalism and underpinned the Atlantic economy of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries: an economy structurally founded on the force migration and exploitation of enslaved Africans.[[3\]](#_ftn3)

The narratives in this section occur against the backdrop of the bustling, noisy, and sometimes dangerous urban landscape of Genoa, a walled-in port city encircled by the mountains and the sea, where local elites, merchants, artisans, servants, enslaved persons, and a plethora of animals of all sorts shared the limited public spaces with foreign merchants and ship workers, who were also accompanied by their own servants and wares. Local socioeconomic networks had a profound impact in shaping the market economy of slavery in this dynamic environment—an economy in which the figure of the notary functioned as the central node that connected the various network actors. The exchange and exploitation of enslaved persons as material commodities was captured in the contracts enacted by these notaries, and as such, notarial contracts will be the central source for the analysis of slaveholding in the late medieval Genoese Mediterranean world.

------

[[1\]](#_ftnref1) Recall from the discussion on page 13 that the term ‘market economy of slavery’ is used in this study as an abstract concept, a heuristic that allows for an analysis of the concrete activities centered on the exchange of enslaved persons as material commodities for various forms of capital—primarily financial capital, but other forms as well, such as social, political, and spiritual capital.

[[2\]](#_ftnref2) These assumptions emerged in nineteenth century historiography and have their basis in the comment by Adam Smith regarding serfdom and enslaved domestic servants. He states that “their slavery was acquiring of a milder kind than that known among the ancient Greeks and Romans, or even in our West Indian colonies.” See *The Wealth of Nations* (New York: Modern Library, 2000), p. 417. Robin Blackburn characterizes the late medieval Mediterranean, for example, as having “some marginal slavery” based largely upon the “trade in slaves as house servants.” See *The Making of New World Slavery: From the Baroque to the Modern* (London: Verso, 1998), p. 55.

[[3\]](#_ftnref3) The importance of the commercial and legal landscapes of slavery to eighteenth and nineteenth capitalism is addressed at by Eric Williams, but he does not address their origins in the late medieval economies of slavery. See Eric Williams, *Capitalism and Slavery* (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1944), pp. 5–7.
