# Chapter 6 The geography of slavery: Genoa as a node of exchange in Mediterranean commercial networks

The port of Genoa was a bustling entrepôt during the late medieval period–a central geospatial node that served to connect the complex commercial networks of the eastern and western Mediterranean Sea. Images from the late medieval period picture the port teeming with vessels of all sizes originating from ports across the Mediterranean, many of which were patronized by foreign merchants who came to Genoa to participate in is vigorous market economy. This chapter will consider the participation of foreign merchants in the Genoese economies of slavery. It will delineate the activities of foreign slaveholders in sales, leasing, insurance, and manumission contracts for enslaved persons, determine the degree to which they participated in these activities, and isolate the locales from which these merchants originated: locales that were often the destination for many of the enslaved.

## 6.1 The sale of enslaved persons to foreign merchants in Genoa

It is difficult to estimate the proportion of enslaved persons living in Genoa who were purchased at the port of Genoa itself. But it would not be unreasonable to assume that a large proportion of the enslaved population had been purchased in the Genoese Mediterranean colonies—such as Famagusta, Caffa, Pera, and Palermo—where the commerce in enslaved persons was a common feature of their bustling port marketplaces. A cursory comparison of the enslaved population in the *Cabella sclavorum* registers with the number of extant sales contracts enumerated by Alessandro Wolf in the nineteenth century allowed Domenico Gioffrè to suggest that this assumption was likely correct.[[1\]](#_ftn1) The noble merchant families of Genoa—who owned the largest percentage of enslaved persons enumerated in the tax registers—were furthermore the same families that dominated Mediterranean commerce in the colonial port cities. It would have been advantageous, therefore, for these families to purchase their domestic servants in these distant colonies where they could be obtained for significantly lower costs. Issues with the existing source material, however, make any sort of absolute assertion problematic. The notarial records from 1348 to 1528, first of all, are vast yet remain incomplete.[[2\]](#_ftn2) The contracts of many Genoese notaries who practiced in the Mediterranean colonies were destroyed or permanently lost as the eastern Mediterranean colonial networks collapsed in the late fifteenth century.[[3\]](#_ftn3) There also remain large swaths of the notarial archive that have yet to be examined by historians, and furthermore, have not been properly sorted and cataloged. Even if many noble merchants had purchased their enslaved persons in the colonies, the exchange of enslaved persons in the port of Genoa would have nevertheless remained essential to the Mediterranean slave trading network. The city was a terminal node in this complex network of exchange—the ultimate destination for many enslaved persons. It was also a node of redistribution—a place where certain enslaved persons would be exchanged once more and carried further westward to destinations like Mallorca and the Iberian Peninsula.

This section will demonstrate that the primary activity of foreign merchants in the Genoese market economy of slavery was the purchase of enslaved persons which they then transported out of the city. They also conducted sales of enslaved persons that they had brought into the city, but this occurred in a much lesser degree.[[4\]](#_ftn4) An analysis of sales contracts enacted between 1348 and 1528 show that foreign merchants represented less than six percent of sellers but almost one-quarter of buyers: for these merchants, the port of Genoa was a buyer’s market. And for Genoese slaveholders these foreign buyers provided a considerable proportion of the financial capital accumulated in the market economy of slavery.

[ image 700009A1.svg ]

Figure 26: The port of Genoa in 1481 by Cristoforo Grasso. [[5\]](#_ftn5)

The foreign merchants arriving in Genoa to purchase enslaved persons were primarily from the Iberian Peninsula, the western Mediterranean islands, and various parts of Italy. In all these cases the notary took care to note the citizenship of the buyer, their occupation (most were merchants, some were diplomats) and whether they were temporarily stationed in Genoa or just passing through. In the spring of 1463, for example, the merchant Benedetto Mainero sold an enslaved baptized Muslim child named Tommasino to a foreign merchant who was described as follows:

> Galcerán Adret, a Catalonian merchant passing through in Genoa...[[6\]](#_ftn6)

The language of these contracts suggests that the foreign merchants purchasing enslaved persons were passing through the port of Genoa as part of a larger commercial itinerary. In another contract from the spring of 1459, the Valencian merchant Francisco de Ibiza, who also was passing through Genoa on a commercial itinerary, purchased an enslaved Circassian named Caterina from the merchant Giovanni de Abbatibus. The young Giovanni was accompanied by his father Antonio de Abbatibus who verbally declared to Francisco and the enacting notary that Giovanni had reached the age of majority.[[7\]](#_ftn7) In a third example from the summer of 1416, the Mallorcan merchant Marco Spil purchased an enslaved Circassian named Sofia from the widowed Bianca Lomellini. Sofia was quite young—only eighteen years of age—and it is possible that she might have been the illegitimate child of Napoleone Doria, the recently deceased spouse of Bianca. If this were the case, it would explain why Bianca had decided to sell her to Marco instead of retaining her as a household servant. It would also explain the condition specified at the end of the contract that Sofia must be taken away from Genoa and never allowed return to the city.[[8\]](#_ftn8)

In these three examples the merchants were from Mediterranean port cities and representative of the typical foreign merchant participating in the market economy of slavery: that is, overseas maritime merchants passing through the port of Genoa. There was also a small competent of overland commerce visible in the sales contracts for enslaved persons from inland regions north and north-west of Genoa, particularly from the city of Milan. In the autumn of 1456, for example, the Milanese merchant Matteo Nigris purchased an enslaved child named Lucia from the merchant Antonio Pinelli.[[9\]](#_ftn9) In another contract from the summer of 1465 the Milanese merchant Cristoforo Panigarola purchased an enslaved Russian woman named Margarita from the merchant Franco Scoxeria, who had traveled to Genoa from the commune of Finale Ligure to conduct the sale.[[10\]](#_ftn10) Cristoforo was an important merchant in Milan who worked with the powerful Borromeo Company, having established a branch in Barcelona in 1437. A few years on he founded his own family company with his two brothers, opening up branches in Venice, Milan, Genoa, and Geneva, with Cristoforo responsible for running the Genoese branch.[[11\]](#_ftn11) This was not, however, his only incursion into the Genoese market economy of slavery. A few years earlier, in the summer of 1452, he had purchased another enslaved Russian woman named Margarita from the merchant Gaspare Lercari. In this case the sale also included the clothes that she was wearing as well as those that she had at the house of Cristoforo, suggesting that he had already been exploiting Margarita as a household servant within the house he kept in Genoa.[[12\]](#_ftn12) It appears that Cristoforo used his time in Genoa to acquire enslaved women to hold in Genoa as well as in Milan. The volume of overland commerce in enslaved persons between Genoa and the regions of northern Italy and southwestern France was largely dwarfed by the maritime commerce in the port of Genoa. Its significance should not be underestimated, however, as it allowed Genoese merchants access to lucrative markets in the kingdoms of Milan and Savoia, where the wealthy landed nobility increasingly desired enslaved persons for household service and as public displays of personal status.[[13\]](#_ftn13)

These examples of overseas and overland commerce reveal that foreign merchants primarily came to Genoa to purchase enslaved persons from Genoese slaveholders. They were far less likely to come to Genoa to sell enslaved persons which they already held. Genoa can be considered, therefore, as both a terminal node and a node of redistribution in the geospatial network of Mediterranean slavery. It was both an ultimate destination for enslaved persons captured in the eastern Mediterranean and another region of exchange where captured and enslaved persons were carried further southwards and westwards into additional Mediterranean locales.

[ image 701007A1.svg ]

Figure 27: Places of origin for foreign merchants who traveled to Genoa to purchase enslaved persons, 1348–1528. The radii of the markers are proportional to magnitude of activity from these regions. Compiled from the dataset of 632 sales contracts.

Figure 27 illustrates the geographical designation assigned to foreign merchants in the sales contracts, with the radius of the markers being proportional to the quantity of merchants from the labeled town or city (some major cities are labeled for reference) attested in the sample of sales contracts. Two things are clearly indicated on this map. First, the greatest concentration of foreign merchants in the Genoese markets originated from mainland Iberia and the western Mediterranean islands. The locales of Mallorca, Valencia, and Barcelona, in particular, were the subsequent destinations for most enslaved men and purchased in Genoa by foreign merchants. Second, the westward directionality of the Genoese Mediterranean network is clearly visible. This illustrates the role served by Genoa as a node of redistribution for enslaved persons from the initiating nodes of the eastern Mediterranean to terminal nodes in both the city of Genoa and further in the western Mediterranean.

An examination of the named buyers from foreign cities shows that certain merchants visited Genoa on a regular basis to purchase enslaved persons. We have already seen the multiple incursions of Milanese merchant Cristoforo Panigarola in the Genoese market economy of slavery. There were several Iberian merchants who were even more active. The merchant Gabriel Marco, identified as a citizen of Valencia, purchased at least ten enslaved persons in Genoa between 1465 and 1475, using the notary Tommaso Duracino to enact every sales contract. He was first recorded in Genoa in the autumn of 1465, where he purchased an enslaved child named Anna, who was from the Canary Islands and only eight years of age.[[14\]](#_ftn14) Anna, or her mother, would have likely been captured at some earlier date by Iberian merchants and subsequently sold a Genoese buyer. This sale illustrates the continuous movement of enslaved persons in the Mediterranean world: in this case, from west to east and back again. The sale of Anna was also the first of three consecutive sales of enslaved women recorded in succession in the mid-morning of the 3rd of October 1465 at the table of Tommaso Duracino, all of which were made to merchants originating from cities in the Crown of Aragon. The two subsequent sales were made to Juan Focoberto, a merchant from Mallorca, and Mateu Viacamps, a merchant from Tortosa. Juan purchased an enslaved Circassian woman named Elena from the Genoese barber Giovanni de Morello for a quantity of cloth from Mallorca,[[15\]](#_ftn15) while Mateu purchased an enslaved Russian woman named Maddalena from the merchant Benedetto de Saulo.[[16\]](#_ftn16) This convergence of three consecutively enacted contracts at the same time of day, with three Iberian merchants named as buyers, suggests that the three men likely arrived at the table of Tommaso Duracino together.

Juan Focoberto and Mateu Viacamps had used Tommaso to record contracts on several previous occasions, so it is quite possible that they introduced the younger Gabriel to the notary. Gabriel would return to Genoa many times over the next decade, as mentioned earlier, visiting in the winter of 1468, the autumn of 1469, the spring of 1472, the autumn of 1473, and the winter of 1475, where his final incursion into the Genoese market economy of slavery would be the purchase of an enslaved baptized Muslim named Maria, along with her five-year old unnamed male child. The seller was the merchant Giuliano Gategario, from the commune of Voltri, and he was represented in the contract by the silk weaver Massimo de Canitia.[[17\]](#_ftn17) Although the majority of foreign merchants who purchased enslaved persons in Genoa tended to purchase women who were captured and taken from eastern Mediterranean locales, only two of the ten enslaved persons purchased by Gabriel originated from this region. This is in sharp contrast to his two colleagues from the first sale: twelve of their thirteen purchases were enslaved women from the Black Sea region. In any case, these three Aragonese merchants made regular sojourns to Genoa to procure enslaved persons for the further westward journey–a sojourn that demonstrated the centrality of Genoa as a node of redistribution in the network of Mediterranean slavery. The commercial traffic from these Iberian merchants offered yet another means by which Genoese slaveholders could accumulate financial capital in the market economy of slavery.

Figure 28 corroborates the assertion that most foreign buyers who traveled to Genoa preferred to purchase enslaved persons originating from the Black Sea region. There were significantly fewer sales of enslaved persons from the Canary Islands or North Africa to foreign merchants. This makes sense considering that most of these merchants arrived from Iberia, France, and other locales in the western Mediterranean, in which there were already vigorous local markets where captives from these regions were sold into slavery.[[18\]](#_ftn18)

[ image 701008A2.svg ]

Figure 28: The regional provenance of enslaved persons purchased by foreign merchants in Genoa, 1348–1528. From the dataset of 632 sales contracts recorded by Genoese notaries.

## 6.2 Foreign merchants in Genoa and the leasing of enslaved persons

A cursory examination of the participation of foreign merchants in leasing contracts enacted in Genoa illustrates they were named as parties in approximately five percent of total contracts.[[19\]](#_ftn19) This demonstrates that the market for leasing enslaved persons was primarily a local phenomenon. Foreign merchants came to Genoa, for the most part, to purchase enslaved persons, not to enter into temporary leasing agreements, which would typically entail a long-term residency in the city or its immediate environs.

There were nevertheless some foreign merchants who participated in this aspect of the market economy of slavery. In the autumn of 1449 the slaveholder Cosmo Goffredis, a merchant from Nice, leased out an enslaved Circassian woman named Caterina to the carpenter Bartolomeo Reggio for a term of two years.[[20\]](#_ftn20) Cosmo was named as a *habitator* of Genoa, meaning that he had been stationed there for at least two years and was probably working as a merchant for a firm based in Nice. This was not his only incursion into the market economy of slavery. He was present in Genoa and had purchased enslaved women on at least two previous occasions. In the summer of 1418 he had purchased an enslaved Circassian woman named Margarita from the merchant Agostino Brusaca[[21\]](#_ftn21) and in the autumn of 1434 he had purchased an enslaved Abkhazan named Agnese from the merchant Marco de Guirardis.[[22\]](#_ftn22) These earlier transactions show that Cosmo was in Genoa on a somewhat regular basis and would have been quite familiar with emerging phenomenon of leasing in the market economy of slavery—far more so than the average foreign merchant. His regular presence in the city was also indicated by the obligation that he be present in Genoa at the end of the contract in order to receive Agnese back into his possession. The influence of Cosmo within the Genoese commercial sphere must have been significant. His son Cristoforo was appointed as the Genoese consul in Tunis in the autumn of 1468, a controversial appointment that was quickly reversed due to an outcry from the Genoese merchant community stationed in the north African port, who had protested the appointment of a non-Genoese citizen to oversee their affairs. Giovanna Petti Balbi notes that Cristoforo was forced to sell the position to the merchant Giovanni Battista Grillo although he received a large remuneration of one thousand Genoese lire in return.[[23\]](#_ftn23) Merchants from Nice were one of the largest foreign groups participating in the sales market for enslaved persons,[[24\]](#_ftn24) and as such, it is not surprising to see them involved in the leasing market as well. In another example we have a foreign merchant serving as a procurator for the lender in a leasing contract. In the summer of 1450, the merchant from Barcelona named Bernardo Dala represented the Genoese merchants Lazzaro de Felisano and Agostino de Ripalta in the lease of an enslaved Circassian woman named Agnese to the merchant Francesco Giustiniani for a term of two years.[[25\]](#_ftn25) Bernardo, like the earlier Cosmo, was also well acquainted with the market economy of slavery, having purchased three enslaved persons during the previous two years while he was active in Genoa: one was a young Russian woman and the others were two Tatar boys.[[26\]](#_ftn26) This repeat activity as a named buyer in the market economy of slavery while stationed in Genoa would allow him to take a supplementary income in the leasing market by serving as a procurator for absent Genoese merchants.

An interesting and important final example occurred in the summer of 1465, when the Venetian citizen Niccolò Barbaro was named the lender in a leasing contract in which he was represented by his brother Giovanni. Niccolò leased out an enslaved Circassian man named Scaramuccia to the Genoese brothers Pellegro and Francesco de Gradis for a term of two years. The contract also noted that Niccolò had been the receiver of Scaramuccia in a previous lease that had a four year term beginning in the autumn of 1463, in which the Milanese merchant Venturino Borromeo was named as the lender and for which Giovanni had presented an earlier notarial contract enacted by the Genoese notary Cristoforo Sisto.[[27\]](#_ftn27) The contract also named Scaramuccia as the *famulus* of Niccolò and as last enslaved by Borromeo, suggesting that he had been emancipated by Venturino before being leased out to Niccolò.[[28\]](#_ftn28) This manumission is supported by an additional clause at the end of the contract noting that the lease was made with the will and knowledge of Scaramuccia who was present during its enactment and agreed to it conditions—a clause that rarely included for the transfer of an fully enslaved person in Genoa.

This contract reinforces several assertions made in this study. It illustrates, first, the importance of Genoa as a nexus of the western Mediterranean slave trade. In this case, we have merchants from the influential Barbaro family from Venice passing through Genoa and participating in the Genoese market of slavery.[[29\]](#_ftn29) The Milanese merchant Venturino Borromeo, who was the previous holder of Scaramuccia, was also active in this market and was an important commercial operator in Valencia and Barcelona as a representative of the powerful Borromeo Company. He established branches for the family operation in Venice in the year 1445 and Genoa in the year 1446 and would have been a regular presence in the bustling commerce of the fifteenth century Mediterranean.[[30\]](#_ftn30) Venturino was no stranger to the Genoese market economy of slavery by the time of the contract with Niccolò. In the spring of 1454 he had sold an enslaved Russian woman named Maria to the merchant Martín Ochoa, from the region of Biscay,[[31\]](#_ftn31) and the following summer he had purchased an enslaved Russian woman named Margarita from the shoemaker Antonio de Passagio.[[32\]](#_ftn32) The multiple contacts and exchanges described by the contract illustrate the centrality of Genoa as a primary node of redistribution in the Mediterranean network of slavery. The contract placed Niccolò Barbaro and Venturino Borromeo in Genoa in the autumn of 1463 where they first exchanged the servant Scaramuccia. A short while later in the summer of 1465 it shows Giovanni Barbaro, representing his brother, and transferring Scaramuccia into the service of the brothers Pellegro and Francesco de Gradis, all of whom were present in Genoa. The contract declared that Niccolò, or his representative, along with one or both Gradis brothers, were obligated to return to Genoa in the summer of 1467 to receive Scaramuccia back into his service. At this point Niccolò would have had to return to Genoa for a few months, or have remained there, to meet Venturino Borromeo in the autumn of 1467 and return Scaramuccia to his service. Finally, the contract illustrates the nebulous categories of enslaved and formerly enslaved. The notary Tommaso Duracino wrote up the contract as a *locatio sclavi*—the lease of an enslaved man—while noting the status of Scaramuccia as a *famulus* as well as his assent to the obligations of the contract. Apart from these two points, the parties to the contract held the same rights over Scaramuccia as a free servant as they would if had still been enslaved.[[33\]](#_ftn33) This blurring of the categories of enslaved and formerly enslaved will be examined in greater detail in Chapter 14.

In all three of the above examples, the foreign merchants who were named in leasing contracts for enslaved persons were merchants who had a continuous presence in Genoa. They were stationed in Genoa for a specific length of time—generally a few years or more—as agents of a foreign firm or representatives of a foreign government. The foreign merchants who had passed through Genoa as a part of a larger commercial itinerary and who were a large component of the sales market for enslaved persons rarely participated in the leasing market. Figure 29 illustrates the places of origin for foreign merchants participating in this aspect of the market economy of slavery. The map illustrates that the scope and intensity of this activity was significantly less than the purchasing of enslaved persons. Merchants from the Biscay region, who were quite active in the sales market, were completely absent from the leasing market.

[ image 702015A1.svg ]

Figure 29: Places of origin for foreign slaveholders named in leasing contracts for enslaved persons 1348–1528. The radii of the markers are proportional to magnitude of activity from these regions. Compiled from the dataset of 257 leasing contracts.

## 6.3 Pellegro Sucha and the insurance of the enslaved

The participation of foreign merchants in the life insurance market for enslaved pregnant women described in Chapter 4 appeared moderately robust on the surface. Foreign merchants represented approximately fifteen percent of named underwriters in insurance contracts, which leaves the impression that many of them had been active in insuring pregnant enslaved women. But twenty-six of the thirty-two contracts where the underwriter was not a citizen of Genoa—greater than eighty percent—were underwritten by a single individual named Pellegro Sucha. The scarcity of documentation referring to this individual led Jacques Heers to suggest he was an example of a late medieval insurance broker. He suggested that Pellegro served as an intermediary agent who connected financiers with the holders of pregnant enslaved women, and furthermore, provided a layer of discretion between the underwriter and the purchaser of insurance.[[34\]](#_ftn34) Heers and Giustina Olgiati both implicitly assumed, furthermore, that Pellegro was a Genoese merchant.[[35\]](#_ftn35) The complete absence of his family name in other Genoese sources, however, as well as its unusual onomastic structure, suggests that he was more likely a foreign merchant resident in Genoa for the years 1440–41, the period in which he was documented as underwriting insurance.[[36\]](#_ftn36) Pellegro was never specified with the “citizen of Genoa” suffix, unlike the prominent underwriters Gaspare Spinola and Giovanni di Negro, who were always identified in this manner within notarial acts. He was, however, designated as an “inhabitant of Genoa” in one contract, a designation commonly used for non-citizens temporarily living within the city.[[37\]](#_ftn37) His surname was also recorded in an inconsistent manner—sometimes “de Succa” or “de Succha”—which was unusual given that notaries were very precise with local surnames, and especially unusual given that he used the same notary for all his contracts.[[38\]](#_ftn38) It was quite common for long-distance merchants to take up temporary residence in large trading cities, and the small temporal window of his activity seems to suggest this possibility.[[39\]](#_ftn39) Federigo Melis has also suggested the use of insurance brokers—denoted as *censarius* or *bancherius* in Genoese documents—emerged with the transition of recording of insurance in private accounts, a transition that occurred in the waning decades of the fifteenth century.[[40\]](#_ftn40) Genoese notaries were, in fact, already serving as brokers in life insurance contracts for the enslaved and the imposition of another level of brokerage makes little sense. The transition from notarial acts to private accounts simply replaced the *notarius* with the *censarius*.

The surname Sucha does appear in a small number of documents from Mediterranean regions where the Genoese were active in commercial endeavours. In the summer of 1456, for example, a certain Francesco Sucha was named as a beneficiary in the testament of Antonio Cicala, a Genoese merchant and resident of Famagusta.[[41\]](#_ftn41) In the spring of 1477 the underwriter Giacomo Sucha, as part of a diverse company of twenty eight underwriters—from Pisa, Siena, Florence, Catalonia, Sicily, and Genoa—underwrote a large shipment of goods from Palermo to Naples.[[42\]](#_ftn42) Two sources contained in the archives of the Crown of Aragon, furthermore, record the rents paid by residents of Sardinia to Pisan administrators in the late thirteenth and early fourteenth centuries.[[43\]](#_ftn43) These sources documented several members of a Sardinian Sucha family residing in the regions around the southern port city of Cagliari. The residency of Maria, Pietro, and Furato Sucha in the Campitano region of southwest Sardinia was attested around the year 1264.[[44\]](#_ftn44) In 1316 a certain Arturo Sucha was likewise attested as a resident of the town of Castidias and Giovanni Sucha was attested in the town of Torre delle Stelle, both located in southeast Sardinia and just a few kilometers distant from Cagliari. All these instances were recorded on Mediterranean islands, at or in the vicinity of major port cities, lending additional support that members of the Sucha family attested in Genoese documentation may have been merchants active in long-distance commerce.

Given this information about Pellegro and his surname—the lack of specific identification of being “a citizen of Genoa” in the acts, the inconsistent spelling of his surname, the short period of activity in the city, the numerous attestations of the surname in Sardinia—it is reasonable to assume that he may have been an itinerant merchant resident for a short time in Genoa. Apart from the unusual activity of Pellegro, however, foreign merchants were marginal participants in underwriting insurance for pregnant enslaved women. It was a practice dominated not just by men from *nobiles* families, but also by the better-connected members of these families. The profits may have been minor, but most underwriters were not minor figures. In the short term these contracts allowed for an additional means of accumulating financial capital from the population of enslaved persons in Genoa.

The participation of foreign merchants in purchasing insurance, in contrast to the underwriting of insurance, was wider in scope and conducted by a variety of people from various Mediterranean locales. This dispersion of individual buyers would be expected. Very few people held more than one enslaved person for any length of time and so it was generally not necessary for them to obtain multiple insurance contracts. The proportion of foreign merchants purchasing insurance for enslaved women, nevertheless, was much smaller and much less geographically diverse than the number of foreign merchants purchasing and leasing enslaved persons. This is also an expected phenomenon. Purchasing insurance that provided coverage on a possible event that might be many months away would only be useful for merchants who were stationed in Genoa on some form of extended residency. Most foreign merchants were itinerant: they docked at the port, disembarked any merchandise they intended to change, and then embarked any merchandise they intended to transport elsewhere for sale. Perhaps some took the time to scour the city for business opportunities or take a short rest. As the letter by Piero Benintendi, an agent for Francesco Datini in Genoa demonstrated, this often involved a search for enslaved persons:

I am informed about the little slave girl you want, and about the age and everything. And it seems to me that for the time being you could not be well served because for a long time none has come from Romania, and at present anyone who has any, keeps them. Despite this I am still trying to find one and I have others trying so far as possible, so that you may be served….[[45\]](#_ftn45)

These merchants—for whom the adage ‘time is money’ would have certainly rung true—would not have remained much longer than a few days at a time in the city. Figure 30 illustrates the places of origin for foreign merchants participating in this aspect of the market economy of slavery. The map illustrates that the scope and intensity of this activity was significantly less than for both the purchasing of and leasing of enslaved persons. Merchants from the Biscay region, who were quite active in the sales market and absent in the leasing market, were minor participants in the insurance of enslaved women.

[ image 703003A2.svg ]

Figure 30: Places of origin for foreign slaveholders named in insurance contracts for enslaved persons 1348–1528. The radii of the markers are proportional to magnitude of activity from these regions. Compiled from the dataset of 222 insurance contracts.

## 6.4 The manumission of enslaved persons by foreign merchants

The manumission of enslaved persons was, like the insurance of the enslaved, a primarily local activity conducted by local participants. The proportion of foreign merchants named as slaveholders in manumission contracts was therefore rather low: approximately five percent of total slaveholders as shown in Chapter 4. The manumission of an enslaved man or woman in a foreign locale was generally conducted by a merchant stationed in that locale on some form of an extended residency but there are some exceptions to this assumption.

In the spring of 1475, the cloth merchant Anechino de Bruges liberated an enslaved Circassian woman Agnese. The contract was enacted in Genoa at the table of Tommaso Duracino, but Agnese was indicated as being in Avignon. The contract was extracted and a complete copy on parchment would have likely been presented to Agnese by Anechino at some future time.[[46\]](#_ftn46) The rationale for manumitting the absent Agnese in Genoa instead of in Avignon is not explicitly indicated and the historian can only speculate for this reason. It might be the case that Anechino was a frequent figure in Genoa and familiar with the commercial culture of the city: a culture that was strongly entangled with the commerce of Montpellier and Marseilles, the two port cities with strong links to Avignon.[[47\]](#_ftn47) In that case he might have sought out a notary who had experience enacting contracts related to slavery and was directed to Tommaso.

Most foreign merchants who liberated enslaved women in Genoa were regular and repeat participants in its market economy of slavery. In the spring of 1469, for example, the Catalonian merchant Galcerán Adret liberated an enslaved Russian woman named Lucia. The contract indicated that Lucia was present at the enactment of the manumission and received the extracted contract.[[48\]](#_ftn48) Galcerán was a merchant from the commune of Falset located in Catalonia who was a regular presence in the Genoese market economy of slavery.[[49\]](#_ftn49) He was named as a buyer of four enslaved persons between 1463 and 1466, using Tommaso Duracino for all four transactions.[[50\]](#_ftn50) It is also likely that he had obtained Lucia in Genoa as well and her subsequent liberation in the city of her purchase might have allowed her to reconnect to her earlier social networks, and perhaps even some enslaved relatives and friends. This is speculation, of course, since the notary was typically silent about the motivations behind the manumission. The manumission was unconditional, and it was also enacted in the house inhabited by Galcerán and not at the notarial tables where he made his earlier purchases. Lucia was only twenty-five years of age, which was rather low for an unconditional manumission. These circumstances suggest some degree of empathy with Lucia, but the exact relationship between her and her former slaveholder is difficult to determine. The contract also indicated an extended residency by Galcerán in Genoa since he was named as the inhabitant of a house and not passing through on business.

An examination of foreign slaveholders who liberated enslaved women in the city of Genoa shows that this small group, like Galcerán Adret above, were regular participants in the economy of slavery and were probably inhabitants for extended periods of time. In the spring of 1447 the Florentine merchant Matteo de ser Antonio liberated an enslaved Russian woman named Lucia.[[51\]](#_ftn51) Matteo was an itinerant Florentine merchant and owner of his own vessel who made frequent voyages in the western Mediterranean to conduct business in places like Málaga, Sardinia, and Palermo.[[52\]](#_ftn52) He was also an active foreign merchant in the market economy of slavery having purchased at least four enslaved women between 1444 and 1455.[[53\]](#_ftn53) In the winter of 1488 the Milanese merchant Bartolomeo de Crivellis liberated an enslaved Abkhazan woman named Margarita.[[54\]](#_ftn54) Bartolomeo was also an active foreign merchant in the market economy of slavery, having participated in transactions related to at least three enslaved persons in 1486 and 1487.[[55\]](#_ftn55)

Figure 31 illustrates the places of origin for foreign merchants participating in this aspect of the market economy of slavery. The scope and intensity of this activity was significantly less than for all other activities regarding the commerce of the enslaved. The manumission of enslaved persons was largely a local process in Genoa and the foreign merchants who engaged in this activity, as we have seen, were those who were usually stationed in Genoa on a regular basis.

[ image 703012A1.svg ]

Figure 31: Places of origin for foreign slaveholders named in manumission contracts for enslaved persons 1348–1528. The radii of the markers are proportional to magnitude of activity from these regions. Compiled from the dataset of 308 manumission contracts.

**

The port of Genoa was one of the central geospatial nodes of exchange in the transnational Mediterranean network of slavery. The examination of persons attested in contracts related to the exchange of enslaved persons demonstrates that the city was an important node of acquisition for merchants across the western Mediterranean region. The regions of Barcelona, Valencia, and Mallorca had the strongest connections to the market economy of slavery in Genoa, but merchants from across France and the Italian Peninsula also came to the city the procure enslaved persons. The primary activity of these foreign merchants was the purchase of the enslaved, whom they would transport to their respective locales for resale. The selling, leasing, insuring, and liberating of enslaved persons were minor activities for foreign merchants in Genoa, although these did occur under certain circumstances. Genoa was essentially a buyers’ market for foreign merchants from the western Mediterranean.

------

[[1\]](#_ftnref1) The four extant registers are San Giorgio 33740, Cabella sclavorum 1413; ASGe, San Giorgio 33733, Cabella sclavorum 1449; ASGe, San Giorgio 33741, Cabella sclavorum 1449; ASGe, San Giorgio 33744, Cabella sclavorum 1460. See Domenico Gioffrè, *Il mercato degli schiavi a Genova nel secolo XV* (Genova: Fratelli Bozzi, 1971), pp. 66–73. Gioffrè’s analysis expands upon the unpublished notes of the nineteenth century historian Alessandro Wolf. See ASCGe, Manoscritto 61, Quadro statistico degli schiavi, fols. 225r–267r.

[[2\]](#_ftnref2) See the discussion beginning on page 23.

[[3\]](#_ftnref3) Only a small sample of the contracts enacted in the Genoese colonies of Pera, Famagusta, Chilia, Caffa, and other colonial locales on the shores of the Black Sea have been saved. An ongoing project, spearheaded by Geo Pistarino in 1971, has been identifying and publishing the extant contracts. To date there have been eighteen published volumes of notarial contracts enacted between the thirteenth and fifteenth centuries in these locales. For a brief overview of this ongoing initiative, see Carlo Carosi, “Notai genovesi medievali in Oltremare: area del Mar Nero,” *Vita notarile* 43, no. 1–2 (1991), pp. 47–57.

[[4\]](#_ftnref4) See Figure 5 on page 91 for the relative proportions of these activities.

[[5\]](#_ftnref5) Cristoforo Grasso, “Veduta di Genova nel 1481”, painting, end of fifteenth century, Genoa, Galata Museo del Mare, inventory 3486; see image in Gabriella Airaldi et al., eds., *Genova e Siviglia, l’avventura dell’occidente* (Genova: SAGEP, 1988), p. 11.

[[6\]](#_ftnref6) ASGe, Notai antichi 894, Tommaso Duracino, filza 7, series I, nr. 52, where “Benedictus Mayneris Pauli... vendidit et titulo et ex causa vendictionis dedit et consignavit Galcerano Adret mercatori catalano Ianue commoranti presenti stipulanti et recipienti ac ementi pro se et heredibus suis quendam sclavum dicti Benedicti nominatam Thomasinus de progenie Maurorum ectatis annorum novem vel circa...”

[[7\]](#_ftnref7) ASGe, Notai antichi 891, Tommaso Duracino, filza 4, nr. 94, dated 1459-03-07, where “Iohannes de Abbatibus civis Ianue Antonii maior annis viginti quinque... ut aservit dictus Iohannes... vendidit et titulo vendicionis dedit tradidit et consignavit Francisco de Enisa civi et mercatori Valentie Ianue commoranti presenti stipulanti et recipienti ac ementi pro se et heredibus suis quandam sclavam dicti Iohannis nominatam Caterina de progenie Zichorum ectatis annorum viginti quatuor vel circa...”

[[8\]](#_ftnref8) ASGe, Notai antichi 482, Giuliano Canella, register 5, 1415–1417, fol. 150r, entry dated 1416-06-13, where “Blanchina filia quondam Neapoleonis Lomelini et uxor quondam Neapolone de Auria vendidit et vendicionis titulo traddidit Marco de Spil de Maiorici... sclavam unam ipsius Blanchine de progenie Gepidarum seu Zichi nominatam Soffiam etatis annorum decemocto... quo dicta sclava debeat educere de Ianua et numquam debeat venire Ianuam...”

[[9\]](#_ftnref9) ASGe, Notai antichi 718, Bartolomeo Risso, filza 4, series II, nr. 235, dated 1456-10-01, where “Antonius Pinelus civis Ianue... vendidit et titulo vendicionis dedit et concessit seu quasi Matheo de Nigris mercatori Mediolanensii presencaliter in civitate Ianue comoranti presenti et stipulanti ac ementi et cetera quandam sclavam ipsius Antonii vocatam Lucia ectatis annorum quatuordecim in circa de progenie [blank space]...”

[[10\]](#_ftnref10) ASGe, Notai antichi 895, Tommaso Duracino, filza 8, nr. 327, dated 1465-06-21, where “Francus Scoxeria de Finario quondam Lanfranci... vendidit et consignavit Christoforo Panigarole civi et mercatori Mediolanensi Ianue commoranti quondam Petri... quandam sclavam dicti Franci nominatam Margarita de progenie Rubeorum ectatis annorum viginti duorum vel circa...” On the history of Finale Ligure and its commercial activities during the period of this study, see Guglielmo Salvi, “Per la storia del Finale. Tre quistioni di storia finalese,” *Atti della società ligure di storia patria* 1ª serie, 61 (1933), pp. 117–72.

[[11\]](#_ftnref11) Concepción Villanueva Morte, “El Aragón del siglo XV como centro de operaciones desempeñadas por lombardos,” *Archivio storico lombardo* 12ª serie, 12 (2008), pp. 114–5; Franco Spinelli, *I Lombardi in Europa: Nomi, sedi, operatività, rapporti con le autorità* (Milano: Franco Angeli, 2006), p. 74.

[[12\]](#_ftnref12) ASGe, Notai antichi 720, Bartolomeo Risso, filza 6, nr. 158, dated 1452-06-01, where “nobilis Gaspar Lercarius civis Ianue... vendidit et titulo vendicionis dedit cessit tradidit et mandavit seu quasi Christoforo Panigarole mercatori Lombardo presencialiter in civitate Ianue commoranti presenti stipulanti et ementi pro se heredibus et successoribus suis... quandam sclavam ipsius Gasparis vocatam Margarita ectatis annorum XXV in circa de progenie Rubeorum... cum omnibus vestibus ipsius Margarite aportat in domo dicti Christofori et seu quas presencialiter habet in domo dicti Christofori tantum et non ultra...”

[[13\]](#_ftnref13) Eugene Cox, *The Green Count of Savoy: Amadeus VI and Transalpine Savoy in the Fourteenth Century* (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1967), p. 234, for example.

[[14\]](#_ftnref14) ASGe, Notai antichi 895, Tommaso Duracino, filza 8, nr. 537, dated 1465-10-03, where “nobilis Cosma Ferrus... vendidit et titulo et ex causa vendicionis dedit et consignavit Gabriele Murcho civi et mercatori Vulencie Ianue commoranti Raymondi... quandam sclavam dicti Cosme nomintam Anna de progenie Maurorum Canarie ectatis annorum octo vel circa...”

[[15\]](#_ftnref15) ASGe, Notai antichi 895, Tommaso Duracino, filza 8, nr. 539, dated 1465-10-03, where “Iohannes de Morello barberius quondam Antonii... vendidit et titulo et ex causa vendicionis dedit et consignavit usque anno presenti de mensis februarii Iohanni Fontecoberte civi et mercatori Maioricarum... quandam sclavam dicti Iohannis nominatam Elena de progenie Zichorum ectatis annorum triginta duorum vel circa...”

[[16\]](#_ftnref16) ASGe, Notai antichi 895, Tommaso Duracino, filza 8, nr. 538, dated 1465-10-03, where “Benedictus de Saulo civis Ianue quondam Antonii... vendidit et titulo et ex causa vendicionis dedit et consignavit Matheo Viacamps de Delcagnis mercatori catalanus Ianue commoranti... quandam sclavam dicti Benedecti nominatam Magdalena de progenie Rubeorum ectatis annorum viginti quinque vel circa...”

[[17\]](#_ftnref17) ASGe, Notai antichi 905, Tommaso Duracino, filza 18, nr. 96 (formerly nr. 287), dated 1475-02-27, where “Maximus de Canitia textor pannorum septe quondam Thome tamquam procurator et procuratorio nomine ut asserit Iuliani Gategarii de Vulturo quondam Bartholomei et a quo Iuliano per Maximus asserit habere potestatem et baliam ad infrascrpta et ad alia faciendum vigore instrumenti scripti ut asserit manu Ambrosi Garumberii notari anno de M°CCCCLXXprimo die XX maii... vendidit et titulo vendicionis dedit tradidit et consignavit Gabrieli Marcho civi et mercatori Valencie... quandam sclavam dicti Iuliani nominatam Mariam de progenie Maurorum ectatis annorum triginta vel circa ac in quandam sclavum unam dicti Iuliani filium dicte Marie etiam de dicta progenie Maurorum ectatis annorum vel circa...”

[[18\]](#_ftnref18) Important local studies on enslavement in these regions are Blumenthal, *Enemies and Familiars*; Vicenta Cortés Alonso, *La esclavitud en Valencia durante el reinado de los Reyes Católicos* (Valéncia: Excmo. Ayuntamiento, 1964); Alfonso Franco Silva, *Los esclavos de Sevilla* (Sevilla: Diputacion Provincial, 1980); Ibid., *La esclavitud en Andalucía al termino de la edad media* (Madrid: Marcial Pons, 1984); Raúl González Arévalo, *El cautiverio en Málaga a fines de la Edad Media* (Málaga: Centro de Ediciones de la Diputación de Málaga, 2006); Vicente Graullera Sanz, *La esclavitud en Valencia en los siglos XVI y XVII* (Valencia: Instituto Valenciano de Estudios Históricos, 1978); José Ramon Hinojosa Montalvo, *Esclavos, nobles y corsarios en el Alicante medieval* (Alicante: Universidad de Alicante, 2000); Carlo Livi, *Sardi in schiavitù nei secoli XII–XV* (Firenze: F. Cesati, 2002); Pierre Macaire, *L’esclavage à Majorque au XVe siècle* (Licou: Plein des sens, 2012); Antoni Mas i Forners, *Esclaus i catalans: esclavitud i segregació a Mallorca durant els segles XIV i XV* (Palma de Mallorca: Lleonard Muntaner, 2005); William Phillips, *Slavery in Medieval and Early Modern Iberia* (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2014); Roser Salicrú Lluch, *Esclaus i propietaris d’esclaus a la Catalunya del segle XV: l’assegurança contra fugues* (Madrid: Institució Milà i Fontanals, 1998); Alessandro Stella, *Histoires d’esclaves dans la péninsule ibérique* (Paris: École des Hautes Études en Sciences Sociales, 2000).

[[19\]](#_ftnref19) See Figure 6 on page 92 for details.

[[20\]](#_ftnref20) ASGe, Notai antichi 715, Bartolomeo Risso, filza 1, series II, nr. 222, dated 1449-09-17, where “Cosmas Ioffredus de Nicia habitator Ianue tanquam dominus et patronus Caterine sclave sue de progenie Zichorum ectatis annorum triginta unius in circa... locavit et pensionavit et titulo locacionis et pensionis dedit et concessit Bartolomeo Regio bachalerio civi Ianue... ad annos duos proxime venturos...”

[[21\]](#_ftnref21) ASGe, Notai antichi 483, Giuliano Canella, register 6, 1418–1421, fol. 24r, entry dated 1418-08-29, where “Augustinus Brusacha civis Ianue vendidit et venditionis titulo dedit et traddidit Cosme Iofredo de Nicia... sclavam unum ipsius Augustini de progenie Zichorum ut redi dictis venditor etatis annorum viginti duorum vel circa nomine Margarite...”

[[22\]](#_ftnref22) ASGe, Notai antichi 577, Antonio Fazio, filza 3, series II, nr. 327, dated 1434-10-27, sale by “Marcus de Guirardis civis Ianue... vendidit et titulo vendicionis dedit Cosme Ioffredo de Nicia... quamdam sclavam dicti Marci vocatam Agnese etatis annorum viginti unius in circa de progenie Avogaxiorum...”. Cosmo appears to have been a fairly important figure in fifteenth century Nice, having served as one of the four *sindicatores* there during the year 1440–41; see Pietro Gioffredo, *Storia delle alpi marittime* (Augustae Taurinorum: Regio Typographeo, 1839), col. 1070.

[[23\]](#_ftnref23) ASGe, Archivio segreto 3050, Diversorum comunis Ianue, filza 30, item dated 1468-10-20; see Giovanna Petti Balbi, “Il consolato genovese di Tunisi nel Quattrocento,” *Archivio storico italiano* 156, no. 2 (1998), pp. 232–3; Id., *Negoziare fuori patria: nazioni e genovesi in eta medievale* (Bologna: C.L.U.E.B., 2005), p. 231.

[[24\]](#_ftnref24) See Figure 27 on page 152.

[[25\]](#_ftnref25) ASGe, Notai antichi 715, Bartolomeo Risso, filza 1, series III, nr. 92, dated 1450-06-15, where “Bernardus Dala mercator Catalanus presentaliter in civitate Ianue commorans... habens Agnetem de progenie Iharchasiorum nunc ectatis annorum decem nove in circa... fuisse locatam per Lazarum de Felisano civis Ianue quondam Antonii Augustino de Ripalta civi Ianue... pro annis decem tunc proxime venturos... Francho Iustiniano civi Ianue quondam domini Andree olim de Franeto...”

[[26\]](#_ftnref26) ASGe, Notai antichi 535, Giovanni Pineto, filza 12, nr. 138, dated 1448-10-21, where “Georgius de Leone... vendidit et titulo et ex causa vendicionis cessit dedit et tradidit et seu quaxi... Bernardo Dale mercatori catalano in civitate Ianue... quamdam sclavam sive servam dicti Georgii de Leone vocatam Andream de progenie Tartarorum etatis annorum XII vel circa...”; ASGe, Notai antichi 715, Bartolomeo Risso, filza 1, series II, nr. 30, dated 1449-03-13, where Antoniotto Campofregoso sold the Russian slave Margarita, who was approximately 18 years of age, to Bernardo Dala, described as an attorney of Giovanni Sul of Barcelona “armerius maior regis Aragonie”, see Gioffrè, *Il mercato degli schiavi a Genova nel secolo XV*, p. 222; ASGe, Notai antichi 720, Bartolomeo Risso, filza 6, nr. 31, dated 1449-06-09, where “nobilis Paulus Baptista Lercarius civis et mercator Ianuinorum quondam Pauli Battista... vendidit et titulo vendicionis dedit cessit tradidit et mandavit seu quasi Bernardo Dale mercatori catalano presentaliter in civitate Ianue commoranti... quendam sclavum... vocatum Iacobinus ectatis annorum duodecim in circa de progenie Tartarorum...”

[[27\]](#_ftnref27) Cristoforo Sisto was a notary who was active in Genoa from 1452 to 1463. His private acts are contained in ASGe, Notai antichi 886, Cristoforo Sisto, filza 1. The earlier contract was dated 1463-11-22. See also ASCGe, Manoscritti 56, Delle nobili famiglie genovesi libro secondo, fol. 274, which notes “Christoffaro [Sisto] artefice Guelfo 1447… partitor per M. 1461… nominato 1453, 6… quondam Bartolini in atti di Iohannes de Luco 1441… collettor del pegno di bando 1441…… rettore del collegio dei Notai 1470… console di Ragione 1475.”

[[28\]](#_ftnref28) ASGe, Notai antichi 895, Tommaso Duracino, filza 8, nr. 364, dated 1465-07-09, where “Iohannes Barbarus civis Veneciarum quondam domini Stephani suo proprio et privato nomine et tamquam procurator et procuratorio nomine ut asservit Nicolao Barbari fratris sui... locavit et titulo et ex causa locacionis concessit et concedit Pelegro et Francisco de Gradis fratribus Blaxii... quendam famulum ultimo sclavum domini Venturini Bonromei et in nuncupatum Scharamucia de progenie Zichorum ectatis annorum viginti quatuor vel circa... locatum per dictum dominum Venturinum pro annis quatuor pro ut ex instrumento manu Christofori Sisti notarii anno de MCCCCLXIII die XXII novembris... hec acta sunt de voluntate et sciencia dicti Scaramucie presentis et consentuentis omnibus et singulis suprascriptis...”

[[29\]](#_ftnref29) This Niccolò Barbaro was named as the son of Stefano. He was not the more famous Niccolò who had authored the report on the conquest of Constantinople by Mehmet II, who was the son of Marco. See Vincent Déroche et al., eds., *Constantinople 1453: des Byzantins aux Ottomans. Textes et documents* (Toulouse: Anacharsis, 2016), p. 463 for the genealogy of the latter Niccolò Barbaro.

[[30\]](#_ftnref30) Patrizia Mainoni, *Mercanti lombardi tra Barcellona e Valenza nel basso medioevo* (Bologna: Cappelli editore, 1982), pp. 94–8; Jacques Heers, “Les lombards à Gênes vers 1460: comptoir marchand ou groupe sociale?,” *La storia dei genovesi* 3 (1987), pp. 34–9; Beatrice del Bo, Banca e politica a Milano a metà Quattrocento (Roma: Viella, 2010), pp. 59–62.

[[31\]](#_ftnref31) ASGe, Notai antichi 720, Bartolomeo Risso, filza 6, nr. 255, dated 1454-04-27, where “Venturinus Bonromei mercator Mediolanensis presencaliter in civitate Ianue commorans... vendidit et titulo vendicionis dedit cessit tradidit et mandavit seu quasi Martino Othoe de Madaria bischayno... quandam sclavam Maria de progenie Rubeorum ectatis annorum XXX in circa...”. Martino was from the village of Madaria in the Biscay region of Iberia and was an itinerant merchant who owned at least two of his own ships. He was active in a number of Mediterranean port cities, including Savona, Palermo and Rhodes. See Angela Scandaliato, “Gli ebrei nel commercio siciliano del grano nel XV secolo,” *Materia giudaica* 13, no. 1–2 (2008), p. 170; Angelo Nicolini, “Tra Savona e Spagna a metà del Quattrocento (1420–1460),” *Rivista ingauna e intemelia* 2ª serie, 38 (1983), p. 24; Id., “Le prime navi inglesi a Savona alla fine del Quattrocento,” *Atti e memorie della società savonese di storia patria* 2ª serie, 43 (2007), p. 38; Jacques Heers, “Le commerce des Basques en Méditerranée au XVe siècle (d’après les archives de Gênes),” *Bulletin Hispanique* 57, no. 3 (1955), pp. 304–8.

[[32\]](#_ftnref32) ASGe, Notai antichi 718, Bartolomeo Risso, filza 4, series I, nr. 129, dated 1455-06-16, where “Antonius de Passagio calegarius in Ianua quondam Iohannis sponte, etc., vendidit et titulo vendicionis dedit cessit tradidit et mandavit seu quasi Venturino Borromeo mercatori Mediolanensi presentaliter in civitate Ianue negocianti presenti stipulanti et recipienti, etc., quandam sclavam ipsius Antonii vocatam Margarita de progenie Rubeorum ectatis annorum triginta quinque in circa...”

[[33\]](#_ftnref33) Mariko Igimi, “Slave Labour and locatio conductio in Ancient Rome,” *Impact* 9 (2020), pp. 69–71, notes the structural similarities between employment contracts and leasing contracts for the enslaved in ancient Rome, and suggests that they might offer insights into modern employment contracts.

[[34\]](#_ftnref34) Jacques Heers, *Esclaves et domestiques au Moyen Âge dans le monde méditerranéen* (Paris: Arthème Fayard, 1981)*, p. 220.* This assumption is seconded in *Laura Balletto, “*Stranieri e forestieri a Genova: schiavi e manomessi (secolo XV)*,” in Forestieri e stranieri nelle città basso-medievali (*Firenze: Salimbeni, 1988), p. 273.

[[35\]](#_ftnref35) Giustina Olgiati, *Genova, porta del mondo: la città medievale e i suoi* habitatores (Genova: Glauco Brigati, 2011), pp. 79–80.

[[36\]](#_ftnref36) ASGe, Notai antichi 653, Branca Bagnara, filza 6, series I, nr. 37, dated 1440-02-19 was the earliest contract; ASGe, Notai antichi 653, Branca Bagnara, filza 6, series II, nr. 273, dated 1441-11-21 was the latest contract.

[[37\]](#_ftnref37) ASGe, Notai antichi 653, Branca Bagnara, filza 6, series II, nr. 19, dated 1441-01-23, where he was named as “Pelegrus Sucha filius Iohannis habitator Ianue maior annis viginti quinque...”

[[38\]](#_ftnref38) ASGe, Notai antichi 653, Branca Bagnara, filza 6, series I, nr. 126, dated 1440-06-07, denoted as “Pelegrus Succha filius Iohannis maior annis viginti quinque...”; ASGe, Notai antichi 653, Branca Bagnara, filza 6, series I, nr. 220, dated 1440-09-19, denoted as “Pelegrus Suca filius Iohannis maior annis viginti quinque...”; ASGe, Notai antichi 653, Branca Bagnara, filza 6, series II, nr. 118, dated 1441-05-04, denoted as “Pelegrus Succa filius Iohannis maior annis viginti quinque...” Inconsistency in naming is commonly seen in the denotation of foreign merchants in notarial acts. See Robert Lopez, “Concerning Surnames and Places of Origin,” *Medievalia et humanistica* 8 (1954), pp. 11–2.

[[39\]](#_ftnref39) For example, see Virgínia Rau, “Uma família de mercadores italianos em Portugal no século XV: os Lomellini,” *Revista da Faculdade de Letras de Lisboa* 2ª série, 2 (1956), pp. 56–69; Luisa d’Arienzo, “Mercanti genovesi tra Siviglia e Lisbona nel Quattrocento,” in *La presenza italiana in Andalusia nel basso Medioevo*, ed. Alberto Boscolo and Bibiano Torres Ramírez (Bologna: Cappelli, 1986), pp. 35–49; and Fernando Morais do Rosário, “Genoveses em Portugal,” *Estudos italianos em Portugal* 38–39 (1975), pp 359–81 for the temporary residencies in Portugal by several members of the Lomellini family.

[[40\]](#_ftnref40) Melis, *Origini e sviluppi delle assicurazioni in Italia*, pp. 5–6. It is also important to note that Pellegro was never named as a *censarius* or *bancherius*.

[[41\]](#_ftnref41) ASGe, Notai antichi 843, Antonio Foglietta, filza 1, series I, nr. 164 (formerly nr. 169), dated 1456-07-20: “Item dentur, de bonis dicti quondam Ieronimi, Francisco Suche ducati decem…” See edition in Michel Balard et al., eds., *Gênes et l’Outre-mer: actes notariés rédigés à Chypre par le notaire* Antonius Folieta (Nicosie: Centre de Recherche Scientifique, 2016), doc. 179.

[[42\]](#_ftnref42) ASPa, Archivi notarili 858, Giacomo Comito 1474–1478, nr. 137, dated 1477-04-01. See Melis, *Origini e sviluppi delle assicurazioni in Italia*, pp. 17–9.

[[43\]](#_ftnref43) For a description and edition of these sources, see Francesco Artizzu, “Rendite pisane nel giudicato di Cagliari nella seconda metà del secolo XIII,” *Archivio storico sardo* 25, no. 1 (1957), pp. 319–432; Ibid., “Rendite pisane nel giudicato di Cagliari agli inizi del secolo XIV,” *Archivio storico sardo* 25, no. 2 (1957), pp. 1–98. The two registers were numbered but uncatalogued by the Archivo de la Corona de Aragón at the time of the articles, and they remain uncatalogued at the time of this study.

[[44\]](#_ftnref44) ACAr, Cancillería variorum, registro 43, Rentas de Cerdeña, fols. 32r, 50v–53v. See Artizzu, “Rendite pisane nel giudicato di Cagliari nella seconda metà del secolo XIII,” pp. 384, 409–13.

[[45\]](#_ftnref45) ASPr, Fondo Datini, busta 341, inserto 5, codice 5681, dated 1393-05-23. Edition in Piero Benintendi, *Lettere di Piero Benintendi, mercante del Trecento*, ed. Renato Piattoli (Genova: Società ligure di storia patria, 1932), p. 130. Partial translation in Robert Lopez and Irving Raymond, eds., *Medieval Trade in the Mediterranean World* (New York: Columbia University Press, 1961), pp. 402–3.

[[46\]](#_ftnref46) ASGe, Notai antichi 905, Tommaso Duracino, filza 18, nr. 155 (formerly nr. 13), dated 1475-03-20, where “Anechinus de Bruges revenditor raubarum in Ianue propter multa grata et acepta servitia et beneficia per eum habita et recepta ab Agnexia de Bruges sclava et serva dicti Anechii de progenie Zichorum ectatis annorum triginta vel circa presentaliter in Avinione existente...”

[[47\]](#_ftnref47) On the commercial links between Marseilles and Genoa in the fifteenth century, see Édouard Baratier and Félix Reynaud, *Histoire du commerce de Marseille. Tome II* (Paris: Librairie Plon, 1950), pp. 478–500; Édouard Baratier, “Les relations commerciales entre la Provence et la Ligurie au bas Moyen Âge,” in *Actes du 1er congrès historique* (Aix-Marseille: Fédération historique de Provence, 1966), pp. 147–68. On the commercial links between Montpellier and Genoa in the fifteenth century see Alexandre Germain, *Histoire du commerce de Montpellier, antérieurement à l’ouverture du port de Cette. Tome I* (Montpellier: Imprimerie de Jean Martel Ainé, 1861), pp. 169–78; Guy Romestan, “Les relations commerciales entre Perpignan et la Ligurie aux XIVe et XVe siècles,” in *Atti del primo congresso storico Liguria-Catalogna* (Bordighera: Istituto internazionale di studi liguri, 1974), pp. 361–75.

[[48\]](#_ftnref48) ASGe, Notai antichi 899, Tommaso Duracino, filza 12, nr. 80, nr. 80, dated 1469-03-01, where “Adret de Falceto filius Alexandri mercator Catalanus Ianue commonrans, propter multa grata et acepta servitia et benefitia per ipsum habita et receptata Lucia eius sclava sive serva de progenie Rubeorum ectatis annorum vigintiquinque vel circa... dictam Luciam eius sclava seu servam presentem instantem et requirentem manumisit franchivit quitavit liberavit et absolvit.. ab omni potestate baylia et mandato ac vinculo servitutis ipsius Galcerani...”

[[49\]](#_ftnref49) Falset was approximately 120 km west of Barcelona. Galcerán was a prominent Catalonian Mediterranean merchant and was active in several Mediterranean port cities; see Rafael Cariñena Balaguer and Andrés Díaz Borrás, “La colonia genovesa en Valencia durante la guerra civil catalana: el secuestro de sus bienes en 1472,” *Anuario de estudios medievales* 24 (1994), p. 143, which describes his interaction in Valencia with the nobleman Francesco Lomellini.

[[50\]](#_ftnref50) ASGe, Notai antichi 894, Tommaso Duracino, filza 7, series I, nr. 52, dated 1463-03-05, where “Benedictus Mayneris Pauli... vendidit et titulo et ex causa vendictione dedit et consignavit Galcerano Adret mercatori catalano Ianue commoranti... quendam sclavum... nominatam Thomasinus de progenie Maurorum ectatis annorum novem vel circa...; ASGe, Notai antichi 896, Tommaso Duracino, filza 9, nr. 157, dated 1466-04-10, where “Antonius de Canobio coyrasarius quondam Iacopi... vendidit et titulo et ex causa vendicionis dedit et consignavit Galcerano Adret de Falceto mercatori catalano Ianue commoranti... quendam sclavum... nominatum Demetrius de progenie Burgarorum ectatis annorum viginti vel circa...”; Ibid., Tommaso Duracino, filza 9, nr. 561, dated 1466-11-13; Ibid., Tommaso Duracino, filza 9, nr. 111, dated 1466-03-15; see Gioffrè, *Il mercato degli schiavi a Genova nel secolo XV*, p. 169.

[[51\]](#_ftnref51) ASGe, Notai antichi 487, Lorenzo Villa, filza 7, nr. 82, dated 1447-05-10; see Gioffrè, *Il mercato degli schiavi a Genova nel secolo XV*, p. 172.

[[52\]](#_ftnref52) Sergio Tognetti, “L’attività assicurativa di un fiorentino del Quattrocento: dal libro di conti personale di Gherardo di Bartolomeo Gherardi,” *Storia economica* 20 (2017), pp. 45–6.

[[53\]](#_ftnref53) ASGe, Notai antichi 783, Andrea de Cairo, filza 3, series I, nr. 22, dated 1446-01-25, where “magister Franciscus de Dallo gramatice professor civis Ianue suo proprio et privato et tamquam filius et procurator ac procuratorio nomine domini magistro Antonii de Dallo patris sui etiam gramatice professoris... vendidit ac titulo et ex causa venditionis dedit tradidit et mandavit... Mathei di ser Antonii de Florentia mercatoris Ianue presentaler commorantis… quandam sclavam... vocatam Citam de progenie Rubeorum...”; ASGe, Notai antichi 655, Branca Bagnara, filza 8, series I, nr. 219, dated 1444-08-23; Ibid., Branca Bagnara, filza 8, series I, nr. 261, dated 1444-10-07, ASGe, Notai antichi 665, Branca Bagnara, filza 18, nr. 145, dated 1444-08-23; see descriptions of these contracts in Gioffrè, *Il mercato degli schiavi a Genova nel secolo XV*, p. 172, asserts that Matteo had purchased eight enslaved persons in Genoa but does not provide references.

[[54\]](#_ftnref54) ASGe, Notai antichi 1030, Niccolò Raggi, filza 18, nr. 140, dated 1488-02-26, see Gioffrè, *Il mercato degli schiavi a Genova nel secolo XV*, pp. 172.

[[55\]](#_ftnref55) ASGe, Notai antichi 1028, Niccolò Raggi, filza 16, nr. 811, dated 1486-11-15, where “Franciscotus de Parentucellis de Sarzana quondam Iohannis Petri per se et suos heredes vendidit dedit et tradidit iure proprio et in perpetuum Bartholomeo Crivellis de Mediolano hospiti in Ianue quondam Cristoffori presenti et cetera... quendam dicti Francischeti sclavum et servum de progenie Maurorum alborum etatis annorum sexdecim vel circa, cui nomen est Georgius...”; ASGe, Notai antichi 1029, Niccolò Raggi, filza 17, nr. 373, dated 1487-05-03; Ibid., Niccolò Raggi, filza 17, nr. 514, dated 1487-07-02; see a brief description of these last two contracts in Gioffrè, *Il mercato degli schiavi a Genova nel secolo XV*, pp. 172.

