# Chapter 8 The socioeconomic networks of slavery in the Genoese Mediterranean: slaveholding and social capital

This chapter considers the way notarial contracts related to the market economy of slavery might serve to create and consolidate social network ties between merchants participating in the market economy of slavery. The analysis of the social ties instantiated by contracts related to enslaved persons will follow Mark Granovetter’s qualitative concept of the strong and weak ties that bind social networks. In the case of the late medieval Mediterranean, social network ties instantiated by commercial contracts will be considered as weak ties, in opposition to the strong ties instantiated by more permanent kin relations. Granovetter argues that strong ties are homogenous and tend to strengthen the cohesion of individual social groups. The so-called ‘strength’ of weak ties lies in their heterogeneity, that is, their tendency to cross social boundaries and instantiate connections across a wider variety of social groups.[[1\]](#_ftn1) This chapter will provide some case examples to illustrate how Genoese slaveholders in the late medieval market economy of slavery used these ties to expand and consolidate their social networks and accumulate social capital.

## 8.1 Sales and network consolidation: Giacomo and Enrico de Podio

The commercial activities of two *artefices* actors from the de Podio family in the market economy of slavery—Giacomo and Enrico de Podio—will be examined to demonstrate how sales contracts for enslaved persons served to instantiate and consolidate weak social network ties with influential merchants from *nobiles* families.

The Podio were an *artefices* family who had their origins in the rural communes of the Bisagno valley outside of Genoa. They settled within the city walls in the early fifteenth century where they were first attested as *habitatores* in local documents.[[2\]](#_ftn2) The first two entries into the market economy of slavery by these new arrivals were made by the shoemaker Giacomo de Podio, who was the son of Pietro de Podio. In the winter of 1437 he sold an enslaved Russian child named Marta to the judiciary officer Antonio de Serravalle.[[3\]](#_ftn3) A few years later, in the summer of 1440, he sold another enslaved Russian child named Caterina to the *nobilis* merchant Babilano Cebà.[[4\]](#_ftn4) If the estimation of their ages was accurate—they were attested as approximately ten and fifteen years of age, respectively—then the two enslaved children were born just a few years apart, around the years 1425 and 1427. Their youthful age and the lack of any corresponding sales contracts makes it reasonable to assume that these enslaved Russian children were of the same mother, who was likely held by Giacomo or some other member of his family. There was also a person named Giacomo de Podio attested in the accounts of the Genoese colony of Amasra in 1423, and if this is the same person, then it might suggest that he—like many Genoese subjects—took advantage of his residence in the eastern colonies to obtain enslaved persons.[[5\]](#_ftn5) It might even be the case that the two enslaved girls were the children of an enslaved woman that he had purchased during this stay. This series of contracts illustrates how the possession and exchange of enslaved women provided a means for rapid capital accumulation by their holders. It also illustrates the social trauma experienced by these women as their children were forcibly removed from their custody and transferred to new households, where the cycle of enslavement would continue.

The network tie instantiated by the first contract was between two men from *artefices* families. The Serravalle family, like the Podio family, were recent inhabitants of Genoa. The family had their origins in the feudal domains outside the city of Milan and the first members settled in the Genoa in late fourteenth century, around the same time as the Podio family.[[6\]](#_ftn6) Antonio was no stranger to holding enslaved persons at the time of the first sale. Many years earlier, in the autumn 1404, he had inherited an enslaved Tatar woman named Melica as part of a testamentary bequest.[[7\]](#_ftn7) Antonio was not, however, a particularly influential person in the civic life of the city. His work as a judiciary officer indicated that he was literate and that he would have had some familiarity with Latin. This allowed him to serve in various minor administrative and clerical positions. He was named, for example, the procurator of Ospedale della Maddalena in Genoa in 1400, where he was responsible in managing the hospital’s accounts.[[8\]](#_ftn8) The sale of Marta would have served to consolidate an existing kinship that Girolamo and Antonio would have shared as recent arrivals to a city whose social and political networks were dominated by large and consolidated alberghi that stretched back over several centuries.

The second contract for the sale of Caterina instantiated a network tie that crossed social boundaries and connected Giacomo to an important figure from a *nobiles* family. Babilano Cebà was the son of Tommaso Cebà and Caterina Lomellini. His father was a merchant and soldier who was active in the eastern Mediterranean region and his mother was from an influential *nobiles* family intricately involved in the Mediterranean slaving network.[[9\]](#_ftn9) He married into the large and powerful Spinola family, taking Argenta Spinola as his wife. Babilano made the most of these familial advantages in the commercial and political spheres of the Genoese Mediterranean world. In the autumn of 1448, he was one of the six representatives of the Cebà family who negotiated their amalgamation into the Grimaldi albergo.[[10\]](#_ftn10) Jacques Heers notes that many *nobiles* families had expressed concern that the merger of these two already powerful families would only create greater political and economic imbalance within the city. These mergers were common and lawful, however, and there was little that the concerned parties could do to prevent this merger.[[11\]](#_ftn11) The Grimaldi albergo was much larger than the Cebà and thus it would be the Grimaldi surname that would be adopted by the six heads of the Cebà and their descendants.

Babilano was active as a first order merchant who operated largely on the financial plane, conducting and financing Mediterranean commerce through third parties.[[12\]](#_ftn12) In the winter of 1431, for example, he purchased insurance for the coverage of 400 ducats from a group of four merchants for a shipment of goods from Valencia to Bruges on the vessel of Arnaldo Tavolario.[[13\]](#_ftn13) In the autumn of 1434 he was named among a group of merchants who were granted a special license to establish offices and conduct commerce in the kingdom of Aragon.[[14\]](#_ftn14) In the autumn of 1452 Babilano was seen intervening in a financial dispute in the eastern Mediterranean where, as one of the *protectores* of San Giorgio, he ordered four Genoese merchants to pay the merchant Cristoforo Pallavicini a sum of approximately 354 Genoese lire. This payment was intended to cover a tax debt that they owed to Antonio Grimaldi, the brother of Babilano. This represents another instance of the entanglement of the commercial and political spheres in fifteenth century Genoa, in which merchants used their administrative power and influence in order to enrich themselves and members of their alberghi.[[15\]](#_ftn15) Babilano remained active in the commercial sphere well into his twilight years. The account books of the merchant Giovanni Piccamiglio recorded some of his commercial activity during this latter period, including the shipping of goods from Genoa to London in the summer of 1457.[[16\]](#_ftn16) This activity illustrates how Babilano, with his pan-Mediterranean commercial connections, would represent an important contact for the de Podio family to the tightly bound network of elite *nobiles* merchants.

Babilano would also become a major figure in the administrative sphere for both the commune and the Casa di San Giorgio. In 1439 he served his first three-month term on the *Consilium antianorum* where he would have been expected to provide political and financial advice to the recently reestablished regime of the doge Tommaso Campofregoso. A few years later, in 1445, he was elected to the *Consilium Sancti Georgii* where he would have been responsible for providing financial and political advice to the *protectores*. He would return for a second term on the *Consilium antianorum* in 1446.[[17\]](#_ftn17) These roles provided the pathway to participate in one of the most influential political and financial bodies in fifteenth century Genoa: the *protectores* of the Casa of San Giorgio. Babilano would serve two terms on the *protectores*: the first in 1447[[18\]](#_ftn18) and again in 1453, where he would serve a partial term as the replacement for this brother Niccolò Cebà.[[19\]](#_ftn19). He would continue to assume many other important administrative roles alongside his commercial activities. In 1455 he was elected to the *Officium provisionis Romanie* where he oversaw the political administration of the eastern Mediterranean colonies.[[20\]](#_ftn20) In 1455 he was also one of the persons designated as a collector of alms for the defense of Caffa from the threat posed by the expansionist activities of Mehmet II.[[21\]](#_ftn21) A few years later in 1459 he was also part of a special ad hoc council called to address concerns about the increasing perception of the bad moral behaviour of Genoese youth in the public sphere.[[22\]](#_ftn22)

The micro-biography of Babilano Grimaldi illustrates that he was an important and influential person within the Genoese socioeconomic hierarchy: one who had influence in the highest financial and political realms. The weak tie established between Giacomo de Podio and Babilano through the sale of Caterina would have been acknowledged by the de Podio family as an important early connection to the wealthy and powerful *nobiles* families.

Less than a decade after Giacomo de Podio made his first appearance the market economy of slavery in the city of Genoa, the slaveholder Enrico de Podio was named as the seller of four enslaved women in three sales contracts enacted within a six-month period. In the autumn of 1455 he sold an enslaved Albanian woman named Melica to the *nobilis* merchant Benedetto Interiano.[[23\]](#_ftn23) A few months later, in the spring of 1456, he sold two Bulgarians—a woman named Maria and a child named Maddalena to the *nobilis* merchant Pancrazio Gentile.[[24\]](#_ftn24) And just a few weeks after this exchange he sold an enslaved Mingrelian child named Lucia to the *nobilis* merchant Oberto Doria.[[25\]](#_ftn25) Enrico was the son of Tommaso de Podio and from the same *artefices* family as the aforementioned Giacomo de Podio. He appeared to work as an itinerant merchant, unlike the tradesman Giacomo, and was attested as an owner of a vessel that carried a contingent of enslaved persons from Sicily to Genoa in 1458.[[26\]](#_ftn26) There are two important aspects to these sales contracts. First, three of the four enslaved women were children or had just reached the age of eighteen years. This suggests that Giacomo had not been holding them long and that they were probably obtained in some Mediterranean port and brought into Genoa. Second, and important for this analysis, the three sales were made to men from powerful *nobiles* alberghi: the Interiano, the Gentile, and the Doria. The micro-biographies of Benedetto Interiano and Pancrazio Gentile will demonstrate their prominent positions in the Genoese socioeconomic hierarchy and demonstrate the crucial role that the weak ties instantiated by these sale contracts served for the de Podio family.

Benedetto Interiano was the son of Tommaso Interiano, a *nobiles* merchant who was integrally involved with the early days of the Casa di San Giorgio, having served on its *consilium* in 1418 and in the *procuratores* in 1419.[[27\]](#_ftn27) He consolidated a strong tie between the Interiano albergo and another prominent *nobiles* albergo through his marriage to Giacoba Vivaldi. He was an active second order itinerant merchant, preferring to conduct commerce in a firsthand manner with his own vessel. In particular, he was regularly active in the slaving zones of the eastern Mediterranean. Philip Argenti describes a contract enacted in Chios during the summer of 1450 where Benedetto named Giuliano de Fornari as his procurator to obtain a sum of money owed to him by Ambrogio Squarciafico, another Genoese merchant who was operating out of Chios.[[28\]](#_ftn28) Jong-Kuk Nam notes that Ambrogio was an active participant in the commerce of cotton, having arranged a rather large shipment of the commodity from Chios to Flanders in 1445.[[29\]](#_ftn29) In two other contracts enacted from the Aegean slaving zone in the autumn of 1453, we see Benedetto operating on the other end of the debt recovery process. In these two contracts, two men named Guglielmo Lambardo and Pietro Forco appointed Gaspare Doria as their procurator in order to obtain the salaries they claimed were still owed to them as labourers on the ship of Benedetto. The contracts are terse, as usual, about the circumstances behind these claims, but it appeared that Benedetto had been in a partnership with the nobleman Niccolò Gentile, who had recently passed away, and perhaps the credits owed to Guglielmo and Pietro were a result of subsequent administrative confusion that often occurs after the passing of a business partner. It might have also been the case that Benedetto was just taking advantage of the situation to be negligent in his payment.[[30\]](#_ftn30)

Benedetto Interiano was also an active commercial player in the Black Sea and Levantine slaving zones. In the summer of 1456, the *protectores* of San Giorgio had procured the vessels of Stefano Doria and Carlo Cattaneo to ship grain from Sicily to Caffa, where the colonists were experiencing famine as a result of the interruption to the supply chain caused by the conquest of Constantinople by Mehmet II in 1453. These attempts proved unsuccessful. The ship of Doria was hit by lighting and sunk in the Aegean Sea, while Carlo Cattaneo refused to attempt the dangerous Bosporus passage.[[31\]](#_ftn31) Instead, he abandoned his vessel in the port of Chios and went into hiding, leaving the underwriters of the voyage responsible for compensating the Casa. Benedetto Interiano was identified as one of several insurers who underwrote the ill-fated voyage and the cowardice of Carlo ended up costing him the considerable sum of 200 florins.[[32\]](#_ftn32) This experience did not, however, deter him from continuing to operate within the increasingly perilous region. In the winter of 1464, for example, he procured the vessel owned by the brothers Oberto and Illario Squarciafico to make a shipment of cloth from Genoa to Alexandria.[[33\]](#_ftn33) It seems that the large profits which could be obtained from eastern Mediterranean trade outweighed any fear of piracy or military actions against his vessel. He remained active in overseas commerce until the end of his life—not only in the eastern Mediterranean, as we have seen, but he also moved into the commercial sphere of the western Mediterranean like many other Genoese merchants. In 1466 he entered into contracts with members of the Florentine Medici family for shipments of alum from the mines of Tolfa to the Low Countries and England.[[34\]](#_ftn34) He remained active as late as 1482 when he was recorded paying taxes on merchandise shipped from the port of Genoa.[[35\]](#_ftn35) Benedetto was not as active as his father Tommaso in assuming administrative roles for the state and San Giorgio, most likely due to his long and frequent absences from the city as an itinerant merchant resident in various Mediterranean locales. In 1463 he served on the council of the *antianorum* but apart from this brief sojourn into administration he seems to have largely avoided political life.[[36\]](#_ftn36) It seems that representation of the Interiano family in the political and diplomatic spheres had been the realm of other members of the albergo.

The network tie instantiated with Benedetto Interiano would have been an important one for Enrico de Podio and his albergo. It would have provided the de Podio family with an important commercial contact to a *nobiles* merchant family in the eastern Mediterranean slaving zones—the very regions that supplied the Podio family with the enslaved women that they were increasingly active in selling in the local markets. Enrico, furthermore, had eschewed the artisanal professions of his relatives and decided to make a foothold in the mercantile sphere by purchasing a ship and taking up work as an itinerant merchant. As a person from an *artefices* family whose members were almost all urban artisans, he would have started his mercantile career with a limited number of connections outside his social group. The sale of enslaved women from the eastern Mediterranean—who were greatly desired and valued by *nobiles* families—would have represented an important entry point into the elite merchant networks that dominated Mediterranean commerce. Benedetto would resell Melica, whom he had purchased from Enrico, less than seven months later to the recently widowed woman named Caterina Pallavicini.[[37\]](#_ftn37) Her deceased spouse Antonio Grillo had sold an enslaved Russian woman named Maddalena shortly before his death and it might have been the case that Caterina wished to have another woman replace her as a household servant. This contract also specifically declared that Melica was originally sold to Benedetto by Enrico de Podio during the previous winter, which again served to reiterate to Caterina and the Pallavicini family that the Podio family represented a reliable source of enslaved women to elite Genoese families.[[38\]](#_ftn38)

Pancrazio Gentile was a second order merchant from an influential *nobiles* family who was active in the local political and financial spheres of mid-fifteenth century Genoa. The connections established by Enrico de Podio to this figure would serve to complement the connection established to Benedetto Interiano which was primary commercial in nature. Like Benedetto, Pancrazio Gentile was also active in the local economy of slavery in Genoa. In the summer of 1432, for example, he sold the Circassian boy named Lanzarotto to a merchant from Mallorca named Ferrer Dalmau.[[39\]](#_ftn39) In another sale enacted in the spring of 1466, the tanner Antonio de Canobio sold an enslaved Bulgarian man named Demetrio to the Catalonian merchant named Galcerán Adret. In this contract Pancrazio was named as the banker for Galcerán who was responsible for rendering the sale price to Antonio.[[40\]](#_ftn40) His experience in conducting and financing overseas commerce would lead to several increasingly influential political and financial positions in the administration of the commune and San Giorgio. In 1459 he assumed his first major political position when he was named to the *antianorum* where, for a four month stint from September to December, he would provide advice to the recently installed French governor Ludovico la Vallée.[[41\]](#_ftn41) He must have made an impression on the French governor, since Giovanna Petti Balbi notes that Pancrazio was subsequently elected as member of the powerful *Officium belli*, an eight member war committee established by the governor in 1460 to manage the ongoing conflict between the Genoese (as proxy for the French) and the Crown of Aragon.[[42\]](#_ftn42) This second submission to French occupation was very unpopular amongst the *populares* and lasted less than two years. In the spring of 1461, the French governor and his court fled Genoa during a revolt in which several *nobiles* families joined with the *populares* to reestablish local rule with Prospero Adorno as doge.[[43\]](#_ftn43) The advisory roles taken on by Pancrazio to the French governor did not seem to have any significant effect on his political reputation and influence after this restoration of Genoese rule. On the contrary, he would be elected to the most powerful financial office in the republic within a few short years, serving on the *protectores* of San Giorgio during the crucial year of 1464.[[44\]](#_ftn44) It should be noted that Genoa would again submit to foreign rule during this tenure: in this case it was a revolt of the nobility who were concerned that the social unrest caused by the *populares* was impacting their ability to accumulate wealth. Jacques Heers presciently notes that the prices of shares of the Casa di San Giorgio—the source of wealth for much of the *nobiles*—had reached an all-time low of approximately 21 Genoese lire in the autumn of 1463. The *nobiles* greatly desired economic stability—and the economic liberty which it entailed—and were willing to surrender their political liberty to obtain it, submitting to Milanese rule in the spring of 1464. As one of the eight *protectores*, Pancrazio would have certainly had considerable influence in this decision. It was a decision, furthermore, that likely pleased the shareholders of San Giorgio: within a year the shares were trading at a price greater than 31 Genoese lire, a rise of approximately 50 percent.[[45\]](#_ftn45)

In the winter of 1466 Pancrazio entered into a partnership with Selvagio Vivaldi to purchase the rights to the custom duties collected by Genoese consuls in Tunisia for a five year period.[[46\]](#_ftn46) It should be noted that Selvagio had served alongside Pancrazio in the *protectores* of San Giorgio two years previously and it was quite likely that the two merchants used their insider knowledge regarding how much profit the previous holders of the duties had obtained when deciding to purchase the rights for the subsequent period. He would return to financial administration soon afterwards. Giovanni Petti Balbi describes how Pancrazio served as the prior of the *Officium balie* in early 1467 during the visit of Ippolita Maria Sforza, the duchess of Calabria and sister of the Milanese duke Galeazzo Maria Sforza. Genoa was still under Milanese administration during this time and Pancrazio was charged with finding the funds to feed and entertain the duchess and her retinue of over one hundred and fifty courtiers. This was not necessarily an easy task as it required persuading the stingy *protectores* of San Giorgio who controlled the purse-strings to pay for the extravagance expected by the ducal court.[[47\]](#_ftn47) The social network ties instantiated by the commercial activities of Enrico de Podio are illustrated in Figure 37.

[image 701016A1.svg ]

Figure 37: Social network ties instantiated by the activities of Enrico de Podio in sales contracts for four enslaved women enacted from 1455 to 1456

These micro-biographies illustrate that Benedetto Interiano and Pancrazio Gentile were persons of considerable influence in Genoese society. Benedetto represented an important commercial contact within the group of itinerant merchants active in the eastern Mediterranean slaving zones that provided the sources for the enslaved persons which the Podio family supplied to the elites of Genoa. Pancrazio represented an important political contact within the powerful group of elite *nobiles* who participated in the financial and political administration of the Genoese government. The importance of weak network ties instantiated by sales contract of the enslaved—as suggested earlier—would have been recognized by the de Podio family, especially since they were from an *artefices* family who had only recently established themselves in Genoa. The following analysis of the entire sample of 632 sales contracts for enslaved persons will illustrate the difficultly faced by the *artefices* in instantiating social network ties to elite families.

Table 8 compiles the likelihood of the network ties instantiated by sales contracts between the three social groups for the nine possible lender–receiver combinations. The numbers correspond to the percentage deviation from the expected normal distribution: a value close to zero suggests that the social category was not a significant factor when transacting a sales contract, whereas positive and negative values suggest a tendency in favour or against the specified seller–receiver combination.

Table 8:Relational matrix between socialcategories of sellers and buyers in sales contracts for the enslaved

| Social category      | % Deviation from norm |                     |                   |
| -------------------- | --------------------- | ------------------- | ----------------- |
|                      | *artefices* (buyer)   | *mercantes* (buyer) | *nobiles* (buyer) |
| *artefices* (seller) | +2.0                  | –0.6                | –1.2              |
| *mercantes* (seller) | –0.1                  | +1.2                | –1.1              |
| *nobiles* (seller)   | –1.9                  | –0.5                | +2.4              |

Two trends are immediately apparent from this table. First, the strongest positive correlations were those in which the social category of the seller and the buyer were the same (*artefices—artefices*, *mercantes*—*mercantes*, *nobiles*—*nobiles*). This indicates that sales contracts tended to be enacted between members of the same social category, or in the language of social networks, sales contracts tended towards a relatively high clustering coefficient with regards to social category. Second, the strongest negative correlation (a value of –1.9) was the case where a person from the *artefices* was a seller and the person from the *nobiles* was a buyer. This indicates that men and women from the *nobiles* would be least likely to lease or purchase an enslaved man or woman from a seller belonging to an *artefices* family than from other groups. The weak network ties instantiated by the sales contracts involving the *arteficis* Enrico de Podio and *nobiles* Benedetto Interiano and Pancrazio Gentile, therefore, would have represented an important connection to the political and commercial networks of the elite Genoese families and thus had significant future potential in advancing the status the Podio family.

As a small *artefices* family only one or two members of the de Podio family would have focused their energies on the political realm. In the middle of the fifteenth century this role seems to have fallen to a certain Cristoforo de Podio. He was the son of Dexerino de Podio and was active in commerce across the Mediterranean basin. Cristoforo was elected to the *protectores* of the Casa di San Giorgio in 1456, served on the *Officium monete* in 1458, and was elected to the *consilium* of San Giorgio in 1466.[[48\]](#_ftn48) These were powerful and influential positions for persons from *artefices* and *mercantes* families and it is not unreasonable to assume that the roles of Giacomo and Enrico de Podio as suppliers of enslaved persons to *nobiles* families played a crucial part in the ascendancy of their family within the Genoese social hierarchy. Cristoforo also engaged with the political economy of slavery. In the spring of 1463, the formerly enslaved spouses Astelano and Caterina purchased a house from a certain Odoardo Lavello. Astelano had been formerly enslaved and held by the merchant Giacomo de Corsio and Caterina had been a servant for Bartolomeo de Podio. In this contract it was Cristoforo de Podio who advanced the funds for the payment for the house.[[49\]](#_ftn49)

The micro-biographies of the *nobiles* merchants in this section illustrates that they were all important individuals within the Genoese socioeconomic hierarchy, having held considerable influence in the highest financial and political realms. The weak social network ties established by Giacomo and Enrico de Podio through their multiple contracts with men from *nobiles* families would have been sought out by their family as important early connections to the wealthy and powerful. These connections appeared to have paid off with the ascendancy of Cristoforo de Podio into the highest levels of financial and political society. In this manner, the exchange of enslaved persons was not only a means by which their holders accumulated financial capital—these individuals were also exploited as instruments that allowed slaveholders to accumulate valuable social capital through the instantiation of weak social network ties.

## 8.2 Leasing and network consolidation: Battista de Bargalio

The following analysis will consider the way leasing contracts might serve to instantiate and consolidate social network ties between merchants participating in the market economy of slavery. Consider the following two leases enacted in the spring and summer of 1427. In the first contract, the merchant Bartolomeo Cattaneo leased out an enslaved Tatar woman named Elena to a shoemaker Battista de Bargalio for a term of two years.[[50\]](#_ftn50) After about three months Battista then sub-leased her to the nobleman Francesco Salvago for a term of two years with the requirement that she serve as a wet nurse for the Salvago family. The notary did not indicate why Battista decided to sublet the enslaved Elena so soon after the initial lease.[[51\]](#_ftn51) These two leases can be conceptualized as instantiating a social network and creating (or strengthening) social network ties between the participants as shown in Figure 38. In this manner the lease of an enslaved man or woman might be considered as another means by which individuals established social network ties—and accumulated social capital—within and across various social categories. In this case a person from an *artefices* family instantiated weak network ties with two persons from *nobiles* families, and each of the two witnesses from the second contract were likewise from families belonging to each social category. These two leases not only illustrate the means by which the shoemaker Battista de Bargalio could accumulate financial capital through participation in the market economy of slavery. They also show how he could accumulate social capital by establishing social network ties to figures from elite Genoese families.

[image 702009A2.svg ]

Figure 38: Social network ties instantiated by the activities of Battista de Bargalio in leasing contracts for the enslaved Tatar woman named Elena in 1427

The Cattaneo and Salvago were *nobiles* families organized into alberghi and both were among the most active families in the market economy of slavery, as shown in Figures 56 and 57.[[52\]](#_ftn52) There were numerous persons from both families named as sellers and buyers in sales contracts and as lenders and receivers in leasing contracts relating to the exchange of enslaved persons. The lease and sublease of Elena by Battista de Bargalio can be conceptualized as an exchange of human and financial capital between members of these powerful alberghi and the shoemaker. On the surface of the contracts Bartolomeo received a significant sum of money while Francesco was the final recipient of the labour of the enslaved Elena, while Battista was the broker who received about three months of labour for no cost. However, and perhaps more importantly in the long run, there was also an underlying exchange of social capital that served to instantiate valuable social network ties between the shoemaker and the elite merchants. As a shoemaker, Battista practiced an important and necessary craft for the inhabitants of Genoa, but there was only so much influence to be had making and selling shoes. A brief examination of the lives of Bartolomeo and Francesco tells another story.

Jacques Heers has implicitly warned that historians should not assume that a person in possession of an elite surname was an influential or powerful person based on the surname alone.[[53\]](#_ftn53) There are innumerable example of historical figures in late medieval Europe who possessed noble surnames but who were of middling influence. There are also innumerable examples of historical figures in late medieval Europe who possessed popular surnames but who held considerable political and economic influence. The construction of micro-biographies for these figures will therefore be used to ascertain their place within the hierarchy of their albergo and evaluating the qualitative strength of social network ties—an approach that will be used throughout this study.

Geo Pistarino notes that merchants from the Cattaneo family were active figures in Mediterranean commerce during the fifteenth century and were particularly active in entering into agreements with Iberian merchants. This was reflected in another incursion into the market economy of slavery during the same year as the above lease, in which Bartolomeo Cattaneo sold another enslaved woman, a Bulgarian whom he had also named Elena, to a merchant from Barcelona named Valentín Garrido.[[54\]](#_ftn54) Renée Doehaerd has demonstrated that Bartolomeo, along with other members of the Cattaneo family, were active participants in the burgeoning insurance industry in early fifteenth century Genoa.[[55\]](#_ftn55) He was very active in the underwriting of marine insurance, particularly for cargo shipped between Genoa and ports in England and the Low Countries. Federigo Melis noted that Bartolomeo underwrote insurance for 159 voyages, for total coverage of greater than 9700 Genoese lire, for the years 1428 to 1431 alone.[[56\]](#_ftn56) He also participated in the insurance of enslaved women. In the winter of 1431, for example, Bartolomeo provided insurance against the risk of death from pregnancy to the widowed Manfreda de Recco, who was the spouse of the deceased Giovanni de Oliverio, for an enslaved woman named Caterina, who was about five months pregnant.[[57\]](#_ftn57) Bartolomeo’s interest in insurance was surely motivated by and related to his vigorous commercial activities. He was strongly involved in the trade between Genoa and England, shipping goods on the vessel owned by Simone Cattaneo back and forth between the ports of Southampton and Genoa in the years 1427 and 1428.[[58\]](#_ftn58) He also played an important role in the shipping of grain from France to Genoa in order to alleviate the famine experienced in the city during the autumn of 1432.[[59\]](#_ftn59) In the subsequent decades Bartolomeo would shift his interests to commerce in the eastern Mediterranean region. In 1442 he was named as one of several Genoese merchants living in Pera,[[60\]](#_ftn60) and in 1456 he was recorded in Famagusta participating in the lucrative coral trade in a partnership with the nobleman Cipriano Vivaldi.[[61\]](#_ftn61)

Francesco Salvago was quite young at the time of the contract, probably in his late twenties given that the notary felt the need to mention that he had reached the age of majority, and furthermore, that he was accompanied by his father during the enactment of the lease. Soon after receiving Elena, Francesco would embark on a commercial career, operating as a second-order merchant in the western Mediterranean, particularly within various Iberian polities. Mario del Treppo notes his presence in several insurance contracts enacted in Barcelona in 1428 and 1429 for shipments of various goods to Genoa.[[62\]](#_ftn62) The work was not without its perils. María Mercedes Costa notes that he was temporarily detained in Barcelona in 1429, along with several other Genoese merchants, as a reprisal by the Crown of Aragon for the activities of the Genoese pirate Paolo Cicogna against Aragonese ships.[[63\]](#_ftn63) The imprisonment was only temporary. As a result of his successful actions in negotiating with the Crown, the *Consilium antianorum* of Genoa appointed Francesco as the consul for the merchant community in Valencia later the same year.[[64\]](#_ftn64) He would remain in Iberia for several years, continuing both his mercantile and consular activities, in particular working to defend Genoese merchants in Valencia who were often accused of trading with the Emirate of Granada. In the autumn of 1433 Francesco was named in a patent letter issued by Oltrado de Lampugnano, the Milanese governor of Genoa, as one of several Genoese authorities resident in Tortosa who were given special commercial and legal privileges to conduct trade in Iberia.[[65\]](#_ftn65) Antonio Era notes that he was resident in Barcelona in 1435 during the conflict between Genoa and Aragon at the Battle of Ponza, in which the Genoese fleet had captured and imprisoned Alfonso V and his military. It appears that tensions were high among the Genoese merchant community now that they were residents in the territory of an enemy state, and Francesco had furiously worked to ensure that letters of safe conduct held by Genoese merchants would be respected and that they would be able to continue conducting commerce without reprisals.[[66\]](#_ftn66) It appears that his efforts paid off: the Genoese merchant community faced modest reprisals and occasional harassment but were able to continue their business in the Crown. It seems that the Milanese—who were governing Genoa rather poorly at the time of the conflict and who were thrown out of the city as a result—were largely blamed by the Aragonese for the conflict.[[67\]](#_ftn67) One wonders if Francesco had some influence in this shift of blame. After a decade or so working in the crown of Aragon he would shift his commercial activities to the Crown of Castile. Phillipe Gourdin notes that he was in Cadiz in 1445, shipping cotton, cloth, and other goods to Genoa.[[68\]](#_ftn68) By the end of the decade he would return to Genoa. His two decades of commercial and diplomatic experience in Aragon and Castile were crucial to his election to numerous important administrative roles within the state. In 1449 he served on the *antianorum*, the consultative body who advised the doge and the council on important political and diplomatic matters.[[69\]](#_ftn69) In the summer of 1451 Francesco was elected to the *protectores* of the Casa di San Giorgio—perhaps the most powerful position in the republic apart from the doge—where he would be responsible in crafting policy for the bank, which by this time was expanding into the role of colonial administrator. In 1454 he served as an officer of the *Officium monete* in Genoa where he would have been involved in decisions related to communal finances and public spending.[[70\]](#_ftn70) He would serve a second and final term as one of the *protectores* of San Giorgio in 1457–58 in which he served as its prior.[[71\]](#_ftn71)

These micro-biographies illustrate that Bartolomeo and Francesco were persons of considerable influence in Genoese society. Francesco played a key role in consolidating the foundations for Genoese commerce on the Iberian Peninsula and he leveraged this experience into powerful administrative and financial roles back home. The social network ties instantiated between the shoemaker Battista and the two elite merchants were thus ties with significant future potential. A comparative analysis of the social network ties created by leasing contracts, furthermore, shows that persons from *nobiles* families did not tend to transact leases with persons from *artefices* families. Table 9 compiles the likelihood of the ties instantiated by leasing contracts between the three social groups for the nine possible lender–receiver combinations. The numbers correspond to the percentage deviation from the expected normal distribution: a value of zero suggests that the social category was not a significant factor when transacting a lease, whereas positive and negative values suggest a tendency in favour or against the specified lender–receiver combination.

Table 9: Relational matrix between social categories of lenders and receivers in leasing contracts

| Social category      | % Deviation from norm  |                        |                      |
| -------------------- | ---------------------- | ---------------------- | -------------------- |
|                      | *artefices* (receiver) | *mercantes* (receiver) | *nobiles* (receiver) |
| *artefices* (lender) | +13                    | +0                     | –12                  |
| *mercantes* (lender) | –6                     | +7                     | +6                   |
| *nobiles* (lender)   | –4                     | –4                     | =6                   |

Two trends are immediately apparent from this table. First, the strongest positive correlations were those where the social category of the lender and the receiver were the same (*artefices*–*artefices*, *mercantes*—*mercantes*, *nobiles*—*nobiles*). This indicates that leasing contracts tended to be enacted between members of the same social category, or in the language of social networks, leasing contracts tended towards a relatively high clustering coefficient with regards to social category. Second, the strongest negative correlation (a value of –12) was the case where a person from the *artefices* was a lender and the person from the *nobiles* was a receiver. This indicates that men and women from the *nobiles* would be much less likely to lease an enslaved man or woman from a person in an *artefices* family than from other groups. As such, the leasing of enslaved persons to the elite merchants Bartolomeo Cattaneo and Francesco Salvago represented an even greater social potential for the shoemaker Battista de Bargalio, given the tendency of the elite to conduct this form of transaction within their own social community. In the summer of 1460, a few years after the return of Francesco to Genoa, Battista himself was elected and served as a member of the *Officium antianorum*.[[72\]](#_ftn72)

The tendency towards high degrees of clustering with regards to social category in local Genoese commercial networks suggests that contracts enacted between persons from *populares* and *nobiles* families served to instantiate and consolidate important social network ties that allowed for an accumulation of social capital. The *populares* from the *mercantes* and *artefices* families—particularly those who leased enslaved persons to *nobiles* families—could furthermore serve as brokers between persons from these distinct social categories.

## 8.3 Insurance and network consolidation: the underwriter Baldassare Lomellini

The thesis that the insurance business in the late medieval Mediterranean world was more concerned with network consolidation than profit-taking has been most forcibly made by Alberto and Branislava Tenenti and Quentin van Doosselaere. In their examination of insurance enacted in Ragusa during the sixteenth century, Alberto and Branislava Tenenti showed that relative insurance premiums were approximately equal to the relative insurance payouts. The premiums in their study averaged around five percent while the ratio of payouts averaged about the same amount.[[73\]](#_ftn73) Quentin van Doosselaere similarly expanded upon the earlier work of Florence Edler de Roover, who had examined the marine insurance practices of several Mediterranean merchants. Comments made by several of these merchants in their correspondence regarding their insurance losses led van Doosselaere to suggest that late medieval insurance was an unstable and unprofitable enterprise.[[74\]](#_ftn74) De Roover noted that the noted Tuscan merchant Francesco Datini had abandoned his insurance business, taking as evidence the following letter he had sent to his agent in Mallorca:

> I do not want any more of these dealings, because I have no luck. Sometime ago I earned fl. 100 in many small bits, then I lost fl. 200 in one stroke…[[75\]](#_ftn75)

The Florentine merchant Bernardo di Cambio similarly bemoaned that he had paid out more in insurance claims than he had received in premiums.[[76\]](#_ftn76) Roover attributed these statements to a mixture of bad luck, lack of business specialization, insufficient participation in underwriting, and the exaggeration of merchants regarding bad news. Van Doosselaere, however, has accepted the claims of the merchants at face value, suggesting that their verbose complaints about unprofitability were genuine. Building upon the analysis of Louis Boiteux, who has framed the medieval insurance contract as an act of solidarity, van Doosselaere has suggested that these contracts served to create and intensify social ties between individuals from *nobiles* alberghi.[[77\]](#_ftn77) This activity, therefore, ultimately served to consolidate and fortify the financial interests of the corresponding alberghi and that the profit motive was a secondary consideration.[[78\]](#_ftn78) My earlier analysis strongly suggests that insuring pregnant enslaved women was a profitable enterprise, but this does not mean that it could not simultaneously have been a means of intensifying social ties. Several individuals appear to have specialized in life insurance contracts on enslaved women in fifteenth century Genoa, one of whom was the merchant Baldassare Lomellini. An examination of his patterns of underwriting will demonstrate and support the notions of Boiteux and van Doosselaere of underwriting as means for network consolidation amongst noble Genoese families.

### The underwriting of Baldassare Lomellini

There were several members of the Lomellini family who participated the underwriting of insurance of pregnant enslaved women in late medieval Genoa. In the autumn of 1453, for example, the merchant Giulio Grillo obtained insurance against the risk of death from childbirth for an enslaved Hungarian women named Elena from the underwriter Gaspare Lomellini.[[79\]](#_ftn79) It was Baldassare Lomellini, however, who was the most active underwriter from the family. Table 10 summarizes forty-seven insurance contracts drawn up between 1453 and 1489 by Baldassare.

Table 10: Life insurance contracts on enslaved women enacted by Baldassare Lomellini, 1453–1489 

| Date       | Name      | Provenance | Age  | Value | Purchaser                           |
| ---------- | --------- | ---------- | ---- | ----- | ----------------------------------- |
| 1453-09-10 | Cita      | Abkhazan   | 35   | 150   | Andrea Gentile                      |
| 1455-11-05 | Anna      | Russian    | 29   | 180   | Bartolomea Centurione               |
| 1456-09-13 | Lucia     | ---        | 26   | 150   | Andrea Erene                        |
| 1457-05-13 | Caterina  | ---        | 25   | 170   | Bernardo Revello                    |
| 1457-06-21 | Lucia     | ---        | 18   | 125   | Battista de Sancto Ulcixio          |
| 1459-03-19 | Caterina  | Circassian | ---  | 170   | Matteo Fieschi                      |
| 1460-04-04 | Margarita | Circassian | 28   | 170   | Teodoro Spinola                     |
| 1462-04-15 | Margarita | Abkhazan   | 29   | 200   | Marina de Marini                    |
| 1462-08-27 | Margarita | Abkhazan   | 20   | 200   | Heirs of Gregorio Bonino            |
| 1462-08-30 | Elena     | Russian    | 20   | 200   | Cosmo de Diana                      |
| 1462-10-08 | Margarita | Circassian | 24   | 200   | Simone Negrone                      |
| 1463-03-05 | Marta     | Tatar      | 34   | 150   | Francesco Ardimento                 |
| 1463-03-11 | Marta     | Circassian | 30   | 200   | Pietro di Negro                     |
| 1463-04-09 | Lucia     | Russian    | 19   | 200   | Giorgio Spinola *olim servus*       |
| 1463-08-18 | Lucia     | ---        | 20   | 225   | Battista Costa                      |
| 1463-11-16 | Benedetta | Circassian | 28   | 180   | Luca Cattaneo                       |
| 1464-01-31 | Maddalena | Russian    | 27   | 180   | Luca di Negro                       |
| 1464-02-24 | Lucia     | Circassian | 22   | 200   | Matteo Giustiniani                  |
| 1464-05-11 | Margarita | Russian    | 20   | 225   | Teramo Recco                        |
| 1464-05-25 | Caterina  | Circassian | 26   | 200   | Domenico and Andrea Spinola         |
| 1464-06-28 | Caterina  | Circassian | 20   | 200   | Gabriele Marchione                  |
| 1464-10-01 | Margarita | Circassian | 36   | 150   | Bernardo Buzzalino                  |
| 1464-11-13 | Maddalena | Circassian | 20   | 200   | Bianca Spinola                      |
| 1464-11-19 | Marta     | Russian    | 32   | 200   | Giovanni de Moneglia                |
| 1464-12-01 | Maddalena | Hungarian  | 25   | 250   | Pancrazio Gentile *olim* Falamonica |
| 1465-11-04 | Caterina  | ---        | 29   | 150   | Brigida Cibo                        |
| 1466-03-07 | Margarita | Abkhazan   | 24   | 200   | Peretta Arbuvin                     |
| 1466-03-17 | Maddalena | Russian    | 28   | 200   | Pancrazio Gentile *olim* Falamonica |
| 1466-07-10 | Caterina  | Circassian | 40   | 150   | Andrea Spinola                      |
| 1467-04-12 | Caterina  | Abkhazan   | 26   | 200   | Francesco de Fornari                |
| 1467-07-13 | Lucia     | Moldovan   | 26   | 225   | Battina Gentile                     |
| 1468-03-22 | Lucia     | Circassian | 29   | 200   | Bernardo Fieschi                    |
| 1468-05-04 | Maddalena | Circassian | 20   | 200   | Argenta Cicala                      |
| 1468-06-20 | Lucia     | Circassian | 25   | 150   | Giacomo Cicala                      |
| 1470-02-21 | Maria     | Russian    | 21   | 225   | Cristoforo Burnengo                 |
| 1470-05-24 | Anna      | Circassian | 30   | ---   | Caterina Maruffo                    |
| 1472-05-06 | Anna      | Circassian | 35   | 200   | Simone de Ponte                     |
| 1473-05-11 | Margarita | Russian    | 37   | 200   | Pietro de Oliva                     |
| 1473-09-15 | Margarita | Circassian | 27   | 270   | Battista Garrone                    |
| 1473-12-16 | Maddalena | Circassian | 19   | 270   | Filippo Camilla                     |
| 1477-07-09 | Caterina  | Muslim     | 22   | 200   | Isnardo Mainero                     |
| 1479-02-17 | Maria     | Abkhazan   | 25   | 250   | Caterina Riccobono                  |
| 1481-01-09 | Maddalena | Circassian | 30   | 200   | Taddeo de Poliasca                  |
| 1482-03-01 | Caterina  | Muslim     | 20   | 160   | Paolo de Mulassana                  |
| 1484-09-22 | Lucia     | Albanian   | 24   | 50    | Tommaso Narexio                     |
| 1485-01-04 | Maddalena | Bulgarian  | 22   | 80    | Giacomo Marchione                   |

Although this table makes no claims regarding representation of life insurance contracts on enslaved women in their entirety—there are undoubtedly many more records in the expansive notarial archives—even a cursory examination of these forty-seven contracts offers an insight into the practice of insuring pregnant enslaved women. The age of the women at the time of pregnancy was relatively consistent, with most having reached adulthood and becoming pregnant in their twenties and thirties. The average age of the enslaved women insured by Baldassare was twenty-six years, slightly less than the average age of all insured enslaved women at twenty-six-and-a-half years. The average insured value of their contracts was approximately one hundred and ninety lire, which corresponds to the trend shown in Figure 32 on page 184. All these contracts were enacted by the notary Tommaso Duracino, who appeared to be the favored notary of Baldassare for this form of insurance. It should not come as a surprise that they used Tommaso, given his prolonged experience in drawing up leasing and sales contracts for enslaved persons.

There are some other evident trends in Table 10. First, the number of insured women dropped significantly during the 1470s. This was not because enslaved women were necessarily becoming pregnant at a reduced rate. This decrease instead reflects the shift away from using notaries to enact insurance through notarial contracts and towards the purchase of insurance through brokers. Transactions through brokers, which became the norm by the end of the fifteenth century, were recorded in private account registers and did not require notarial mediation.[[80\]](#_ftn80) The proportion of purchasers, furthermore, were increasingly individuals from *artefices* families, suggesting that the *nobiles* and *mercantes* alberghi had already begun to abandon the use of notaries for insurance and shifted towards recording these transactions in private accounts.

Figure 39 illustrates the frequency of purchase of insurance from Baldassare according to social group. The *nobiles* were predominant as purchasers of insurance, representing over half (approximately fifty-three percent) of buyers. This is greater than the forty-nine percent from the overall sample but does not represent a significant difference.[[81\]](#_ftn81) Baldassare, however, underwrote a greater proportion of insurance for the *artefices* than his contemporaries: twenty-nine percent of his buyers were from *artefices* families, compared with fourteen percent for the overall sample. This is almost a mirror inverse of the situation of the *mercantes*, who represented twenty-nine percent of buyers in the overall sample but only thirteen percent of the insurance underwritten by Baldassare. There were also a small proportion of foreign merchants who purchased insurance on enslaved women, about five percent, which was approximately equal to the proportion from the overall sample.

[ image 703007A2. jpg ]

Figure 39: Socioeconomic distribution of buyers of insurance on enslaved women from Baldassare Lomellini. Compiled from the dataset of 222 contracts enacted during the period 1400–1510.

### Lomellini social networks on the local scale

Genoese socioeconomic networks were formed from the complex web of connections between actors from across the spectrum of socioeconomic groups. These networks operated on a range of geospatial scales, from the neighbourhood networks on the micro-scale to trans-national Mediterranean networks on the macro-scale. An examination of the life insurance contracts for enslaved women underwritten by Baldassare Lomellini will illustrate the local networks of enslavement within the city of Genoa and its locales. These contracts served to create new social ties, as well as strengthen existing social ties, within local networks of enslavement.

Insurance contracts underwritten by members of one group in order to protect members of another group altered these networks in two ways. In cases where there were significant existing socioeconomic connections between the groups—for example, kinship connections through marriage or economic connections through commercial partnerships—insurance served to consolidate and strengthen the existing socioeconomic network.[[82\]](#_ftn82) In cases where there were minimal socioeconomic connections between the groups, insurance served to expand the size and diversify the social character the existing socioeconomic network.[[83\]](#_ftn83) In both instances the social ties instantiated by these contracts served to amplify the social integration and economic strength of the alberghi of the principals named in the contract.

The life insurance contracts underwritten by Baldassare Lomellini served to increase the density of existing Lomellini social networks primarily through the strengthening of existing kinship relations. A micro-biographical analysis of two of the buyers listed in Table 10 will demonstrate how existing direct and indirect kinship ties connecting the Lomellini family to other elite families were strengthened by the weak commercial ties instantiated by these contracts. The purchasers in two contracts—Andrea Gentile and Filippo Camilla—were married to women from the Lomellini albergo.

In the fall of 1453 Andrea Gentile had purchased insurance for an enslaved Abkhazan named Cita, who was about eight months pregnant, from Baldassare Lomellini and Lodisio Negrone, who underwrote the amount in partnership.[[84\]](#_ftn84) Andrea was married to Clarisia Lomellini, who was the aunt of Baldassare, and as such the couple would have been very familiar to him.[[85\]](#_ftn85) The Gentile were a prominent albergo in the economy of Mediterranean slavery and the administration of slaving zones. Andrea himself was an important figure in the commercial and political world of the western Mediterranean, particularly in Corsica, Mallorca, and Valencia. His father Giacomo was the signore of Brando di Capocorso, a coastal village on the north-eastern shore of Corsica that was under Genoese dominion, and it was likely that Andrea had resided there for some time. In the autumn of 1429 Andrea was part of a Genoese delegation sent to Valencia to warn merchants about the activities of two Genoese pirates in the area and to reassure Alfonso V of the good intentions of the Genoese residents in the city.[[86\]](#_ftn86) He spent the next several years representing the Gentile business interests in Aragon. The work of foreign merchants was often a precarious endeavour that required careful diplomatic skills and important trans-national contacts. In the spring of 1431 Andrea was active in commerce in the port of Valencia, shipping merchandise between the city and the Low Countries.[[87\]](#_ftn87) In the autumn of the same year, he was detained in Mallorca under suspicion that he was transporting a shipment of wheat for Muslim merchants in Granada. The intervention of the Milanese duke Francesco Maria Visconti through a direct appeal to Alfonso V allowed Andrea and his goods to be released.[[88\]](#_ftn88) In the autumn of 1433, a letter from the *antianorum* of Genoa to Alfonso V identified Andrea as one of several authoritative Genoese merchants in Aragon who served as an intermediaries between the local community and the increasingly powerful Genoese merchant community in Valencia.[[89\]](#_ftn89) The rise of hostilities between Alfonso V and Milan, however, prompted the return Andrea to Genoa after 1434. In the spring of 1436 he was attested as a witness in a document naming the prisoners captured by the Genoese in the Battle of Ponza, an extensive list of Aragonese nobility that included Alfonso V himself and his entire court.[[90\]](#_ftn90) The purpose of the document was to determine ransom values for the prisoners and it is possible that Andrea was present to offer advice as well as witness, given his years of experience within the Kingdom of Aragon. After the resumption of commercial and diplomatic relations with Alfonso V in 1444, Andrea assumed various political roles within the local Genoese administration to advocate for Genoese merchants in Iberia, where his *albergo* continued their strong presence. In the spring of 1449, for example, he appealed to the doge of Genoa to negotiate for the lifting of gabelles that had been applied to Genoese merchants in Valencia—gabelles that had been detrimental to the economic activities of his family.[[91\]](#_ftn91) In 1451 he was elected to the *antianorum*—the eight-member council that provided advice to the doge on political matters. In the autumn of the same year, he served as an advisor to the doge on diplomatic strategy regarding military hostilities between Castile and Granada, resulting in the decree forbidding the shipping of any merchandise to Granada that might be used for military purposes.[[92\]](#_ftn92)

This micro-biography of Andrea Gentile demonstrates that he was a person of influence in the political world of fifteenth century Genoa. The underwriting by Baldassare Lomellini on the enslaved Cita served to instantiate a new socioeconomic tie to complement the earlier kinship tie that was instantiated by his marriage to Clarissa Lomellini. Figure 40 illustrates how this new tie increased the network density between the Lomellini and Gentile families.

[ image 704004A2. jpg ]

Figure 40: Social network ties instantiated through the life insurance contract underwritten by Baldassare Lomellini for the enslaved Cita, held by Antonio Gentile.

In the fall of 1473, the nobleman Filippo Camilla purchased life insurance from Baldassare Lomellini for an enslaved Circassian woman named Margarita who was about eight months pregnant.[[93\]](#_ftn93) Filippo was also married to a woman from the Lomellini albergo named Pellegra Lomellini. She and the underwriter Baldassare shared their great-grandfather Napoleone Lomellini as a common ancestor.[[94\]](#_ftn94) The Camilla albergo were disproportionately influential in Mediterranean commerce and in the administration of the Casa di San Giorgio, despite their relatively small size. Cattaneo Camilla, the father of Filippo, was an active figure in eastern Mediterranean commerce. In the winter of 1427 he was one of four persons assigned to address the threat to Genoese commerce in Rhodes and surrounding areas following the invasion of Cyprus by Mamluk Egypt.[[95\]](#_ftn95) He also served as one of the eight *protectores* for the Casa di San Giorgio for the period 1435–36.[[96\]](#_ftn96) Filippo and his brother Gentile Camilla followed in their father’s footsteps, both exerting a considerable degree of influence in the financial affairs of the Genoese merchant colonies in the eastern Mediterranean. Filippo was elected as a *protector* of the Casa di San Giorgio an unprecedented three times—in 1461, 1469, and 1475—and served as the prior during his final appointment.[[97\]](#_ftn97) He also served as an ambassador for San Giorgio to the papal curia in 1469 and 1470, where he actively sought financial assistance from the papacy for the defense of Caffa, the primary source for enslaved persons from the east and which had come increasingly under the eye of Mehmet II.[[98\]](#_ftn98) This embassy included meetings with the cardinals Rodrigo Borgia, Basilios Bessarion, and Filippo Calandrini, although the attempt to secure papal funds for the defense of the Genoese colony was ultimately futile.[[99\]](#_ftn99) This experience, despite its ultimate failure, was likely one reason that he would serve again as an ambassador in Rome for San Giorgio in 1491.[[100\]](#_ftn100) He also served as a *protector* for the *Officium 1444*, where he performed various administrative duties related to the administration of the eastern colonies. In the summer of 1483, for example, he negotiated the purchase of the census gabelle of Chios for San Giorgio which had been held by the nobleman Simone Lercari.[[101\]](#_ftn101) Filippo also worked in close consort with his brother Gentile, who was actively involved in the colonial administration of Famagusta and Caffa. Gentile served as a *massarius* for Caffa in 1467,[[102\]](#_ftn102) and in the following year became one of the two consuls of Caffa, a position that gave him a central role in administering both the financial and political affairs of the colony on behalf of San Giorgio.[[103\]](#_ftn103) He would serve a second term in 1469 as a *massarius* for the colony.[[104\]](#_ftn104) And in 1484 he followed in the footsteps of his brother Filippo and was elected as a *protector* of the Casa di San Giorgio.[[105\]](#_ftn105)

This micro-biography of Filippo Camilla demonstrates that he was a person of influence in the financial world of fifteenth century Genoa, particularly in the operations and administration of the Casa di San Giorgio. The underwriting by Baldassare Lomellini on the enslaved Margarita served to instantiate an additional socioeconomic tie to complement the earlier kinship tie that was instantiated by his marriage to Clarissa Lomellini. Figure 41 illustrates how this new tie increased the network density between the Lomellini and Camilla families.

[ image 704005A3. jpg ]

Figure 41: Social network ties instantiated through the life insurance contract underwritten by Baldassare Lomellini for the enslaved Margarita, held by Filippo Camilla

The insurance contract underwritten for Andrea Gentile increased the density of the social network between the Lomellini and Gentile alberghi, which served to increase the influence of the Lomellini in the local political and western colonial commercial spheres in which the Gentile were embedded. The insurance contract underwritten for Filippo Camilla increased the density of the social network between the Lomellini and Camilla alberghi, which served to increase the influence of the Lomellini in the local financial and eastern colonial commercial spheres in which the Camilla were embedded.

These case studies illustrate that life insurance on pregnant enslaved women was not only a means to protect the slaveholder from the economic loss that would incur from the death of their captive women. They also illustrate how slaveholders used the enslaved in an instrumental manner to strengthen social networks among individuals and families. These insurance contracts were yet another means by which slaveholders and those connected to them could extract social and financial capital from the exchange and exploitation of enslaved persons.

**

This chapter considered an understudied aspect of the market economy of slavery: the accumulation of social capital through the exchange of enslaved persons. It demonstrated how social ties instantiated through the sales and leasing of enslaved persons by slaveholders from obscure *populares* families were intended to instantiate weak ties with the social networks of influential and wealthy Genoese merchants. These slaveholders were able to embed themselves and their families into these elite networks by providing the ‘luxury items’—that is, the enslaved persons—sought after by men and women from elite families. This chapter also demonstrated how underwriting in the market economy of slavery, apart from being a means of accumulation financial capital, was also a means of accumulating social capital by both strengthening and expanding the social networks of the underwriter and his albergo. The case studies also illustrated how this accumulation of social capital resulted in greater prestige and influence for the individuals and families active in the market economy of slavery.
 

------

[[1\]](#_ftnref1) Mark Granovetter, “The Strength of Weak Ties,” *American Journal of Sociology* 78, no. 6 (1973), pp. 1368–9; Sarah Jack, “The Role, Use and Activation of Strong and Weak Network Ties: A Qualitative Analysis,” *Journal of Management Studies* 42, no. 6 (2005), p. 1236.

[[2\]](#_ftnref2) ASCGe, Manoscritti 26, Origine e fasti delle nobili famiglie di Genova, fol. 867r.

[[3\]](#_ftnref3) ASGe, Notai antichi 579, Antonio Fazio, filza 5, series I, nr. 5, dated 1437-02-06, where “Iacobus de Podiis calsolarius civis Ianue quondam Petri sponte vendidit et titulo vendicionis dedit Antonio de Seravalle quarelario civi Ianue... quandam sclavam ipsius Iacobi vocatam Marta etatis annorum decem in circa de progenie Rubeorum...”

[[4\]](#_ftnref4) ASGe, Notai antichi 580, Antonio Fazio, filza 6, series II, nr. 193, dated 1440-07-28; see description in Domenico Gioffrè, *Il mercato degli schiavi a Genova nel secolo XV* (Genova: Fratelli Bozzi, 1971), p. 220.

[[5\]](#_ftnref5) ASGe, San Giorgio 36825, Caffae massaria 1423, fols. 42r, 177r; see also Evgeny Khvalkov, *The Colonies of Genoa in the Black Sea Region: Evolution and Transformation* (New York: Routledge, 2017), p. 147.

[[6\]](#_ftnref6) ASCGe, Manoscritti 47, Famiglie nobili di Genova DVCCI, fol 465r. This was around the time that the Milanese were starting to become involved with Genoese political and commercial affairs. See Stella Leprai, “La ‘chiave de Lombardia’: un’area al confine tra Milano, Genova e Firenze,” *Archivio storico italiano* 167 (2009), pp. 450–4; Giovanna Petti Balbi, *Negoziare fuori patria: nazioni e genovesi in eta medievale* (Bologna: C.L.U.E.B., 2005), pp. 53–4.

[[7\]](#_ftnref7) ASGe, Notai antichi 444, Oberto Foglietta, filza 1, nr. 240, dated 1404-11-04. See Luigi Tommaso Belgrano, “Della vita privata dei genovesi,” *Atti della società ligure di storia patria* 1ª serie, 4 (1866), p. 120.

[[8\]](#_ftnref8) ASGe, Compere e mutui 446, Compera magna mutuorum veterum 1400, compagne PN B, fol. 44r–v; see details in Carlo Marchesani and Giorgio Sperati, *Ospedali genovesi nel Medioevo* (Genova: Società ligure di storia patria, 1981), pp. 175, 181.

[[9\]](#_ftnref9) ASCGe, Manoscritti 18, Famiglie di Genova antiche e moderne. Tomo V, parte III. Lettera C, fols. 2v—4r, which notes that Tommaso played a crucial role as the captain of a fleet of vessels which defended Chios from a Venetian attack in 1431. He was also nominated as one of the captains of Famagusta in 1434, perhaps as a reward for his service in defending Chios. On his marriage to Caterina Lomellini see Ferdinando Gabotto, “A proposito di una poesia inedita di Giovan Mario Filelfo a Tommaso Campofregoso,” *Atti della società ligure di storia patria* 1ª serie, 19 (1889), p. 493.

[[10\]](#_ftnref10) This was recorded in a contract enacted by the notary and chancellor Giacomo Bracelli. See edition in Giovanni Andrea Ascheri, *Notizie storiche intorno alla riunione delle famiglie in alberghi in Genova* (Genova: Tipografia Faziola, 1846), pp. 74–6, who does not provide a reference.

[[11\]](#_ftnref11) ASGe, Archivio segreto 541, Diversorum cancellarie 1448, entry dated 1448-12-03; see Jacques Heers, *Le clan familial au Moyen Age: étude sur les structures politiques et sociales des milieux urbains* (Paris: Presses universitaires de France, 1974), pp. 92–3.

[[12\]](#_ftnref12) See Robert Lopez, “Proxy in Medieval Trade,” in *Order and Innovation in the Middle Ages: Essays in Honor of Joseph R. Strayer*, ed. William Jordan, Bruce McNab, and Teofilo Ruiz (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1976), pp. 187–94, for a discussion on this phenomenon.

[[13\]](#_ftnref13) ASGe, Notai antichi 666, Branca Bagnara, filza 19, series III, nr. 190c, dated 1431-12-12, where “inferius nominati confessi fuerunt et in veritate publice recognoverunt mihi notario infrascripto tanquam publice persone officio publico stipulanti et recipienti nomine et vice Babilani de Sipionibus olim Ceba civis Ianue... hinc ad menses sex proxime venturos, quantitates peccuniarum infrascriptas, videlicet Thomas Centurionus florenos centum Ianuinorum, Antoniotus Italianus florenos centum Ianuinorum, Marcelinus Grillus florenos centum Ianuinorum, Petrus Iudex florenos centum Ianuinorum... super navem patronizatam per Alvardum Taolarii sive alium pro eo, sana et salva aplicuerit et conducta fuerit ad salvamentum in portum Scluxarum, et ibi in terra ad salutem fuerit exonusta et pro rata, tunc et eo casu presens instrumentum sit cassum, irritum et nullius valoris et pro rata. Incipiendo huiusmodi risicum postquam dicta navis velificaverit et sive receserit et sive velificavit et seu recesit de Valentia...”

[[14\]](#_ftnref14) ASGe, Archivio segreto 1780, Litterarum registri 1428–1437, fols. 118v–119r, entry nr. 395, dated 1434-09-24, where “in dicta civitate... requirimus et rogamus attente quatenus eisdem inscriptis Ianuensibus et bonis suis procuratoribusque et negotiorum gestoribus eorumdem franchisiam et immunitatem predictam inviolabiliter observetis et observare ab omnibus inconcuse faciatis nil in contrarium tentaturi... Babilanus Ceba...”; see Raffaele di Tucci, “Nuovi documenti e notizie sul genovese Antonio Malfante, il primo viaggiatore europeo nell’Africa occidentale (1477),” *Bollettino della società geografica italiana* 6ª serie, 9 (1934), pp. 201–2.

[[15\]](#_ftnref15) ASGe, Notai antichi 921, Lorenzo Calvi, filza 1, series III, nr. 64, dated 1453-08-17, where “Hoc est exemplum seu registratio cuiusdam littere cambii scripte manu Babilani de Grimaldis in Ianua MCCCCLII die XX decembris directe Petro de Gravaigo, Dominico de Rippa, Inofio Pinello et Egidio de Carmadino in Pera... Solvatis per istam primam cambii, termino solito Cristoforo Palavicino libras trescentas quinquaginta quattuor soldos octo et denarios IIII ad rationem unius perperi et haratos quattuordecim a pro singula libra sive lb. CCCLIIII, s. VIII d. IIII pro lb. I pro valuta hic habita ab Antonio de Grimaldis fratre nostro et solutos ponatis per contra perperos D michi solvere missos, computata gabella nec alia, paratus vestra. Babilanus de Glimaldis manu propria...”; see edition in Ausilia Roccatagliata, ed., “Notai genovesi in oltremare: Atti rogati a Pera (1453),” *Atti della società ligure di storia patria* 2ª serie, 39, no. 1 (1999), doc. 14, pp. 150–2; see also Thierry Ganchou, “Le rachat des Notaras après la chute de Constantinople ou les relations étrangères de l’élite byzantine au XVe siècle,” in *Migrations et diasporas méditerranéennes (Xe–XVIe siècles)*, ed. Michel Balard and Alain Ducellier (Paris: Éditions de la Sorbonne, 2017), pp 186, 190.

[[16\]](#_ftnref16) Giovanni Piccamiglio, *Le livre de comptes de Giovanni Piccamiglio, homme d’affaires génois (1456–1459)*, ed. Jacques Heers (Aix-en-Provence: Éditions Ophrys, 1959), where “debet nobis... Babilano de Grimaldis Ceba et dictus pro cartulario secundo de 53 scripto per Paulum Ragium de racione Pomeline sororis nostre de XV... £22... recepimus 1457 die 31 augusti in Branchaleone de Auria in LV... item die 24 marcii in Demetrio Pinelo et de eo in Babilano de Grimaldis et de eo in cambio pro Londone in racione Francesci Spinulle in CIIII... £190...”

[[17\]](#_ftnref17) ASCGe, Manoscritti 441, Memorie della città di Genova e di tutto il suo dominio 1437–1464, fols. 28v, 114v, and 129r.

[[18\]](#_ftnref18) ASGe, San Giorgio 111, Liber diversorum negotiorum spectabilis Officii dominorum Protectorum comperarum Sancti Georgii MCCCCLIII, fol. 8r, where “ex officio de MCCCCLIII nomina illorum qui his affueerunt sunt hec Filippus Cataneus prior, Andalo Maruffus, Benedictus Spinula, Guirardis de Goano, Urbanus de Nigro, Babilanus de Grimaldis, Antonius Caffarotus loco Iohannis Pansani absentis ex causa necessitatis, Nicolaus de Furnariis...”; see also Lucien Letteron, ed., “Convention par laquelle Galeazzo de Campofregoso cède à l’Office de St-Georges les places de St-Florent, Biguglia, Bastia et Corte (1453),” *Bulletin de la société des sciences historiques et naturelles de la Corse* 1, no. 17 (1882), pp. 510–2.

[[19\]](#_ftnref19) ASGe, San Giorgio 8, Instrumenta scripturae sententiae inter comune genuense et comperas Sancti Georgii et regem Cipri 1391 in 1445, fols. 95r–105v, entry dated 1447-07-08, where “...nomina autem illorum de officio novo de XXXXVIII° qui affuerunt sunt ut infra absente tantummodo Alberto Spinula: Simon Iustinianus prior, Illarius Grillus, Andalo Marrufus, Urbanus de Nigro, Guiraldus de Goano, Babilanus Ceba et Lodisius de Oliva...”; see edition in Louis de Mas Latrie, *Histoire de l’île de Chypre sous le règne des princes de la maison de Lusignan*. *Tome III* (Paris: Imprimerie Imperiale, 1852), pp. 34–48.

[[20\]](#_ftnref20) ASGe, Manoscritti membranacei XXIV, Contractuum ac privegiorum comperarum Sancti Georgii 1453–1476, fol. 19r, where “ex officio autem provisionis Romanie officiales omnes presentes fuerunt qui sunt hi Daminaus Iusitinianus prior, Andreas de Roca, Francus Marabotus, Georgius Pinellus, Sistus de Monelia, Babilanus de Grimaldis, Iohannes Picamilium et Daminaus de Leone...”; see editoion in Amadeo Vigna, ed., *Codice diplomatico delle colonie Tauro-Liguri durante la signoria dell’ufficio di San Giorgio (1453–75). Tomo primo* (Genova: Società ligure di storia patria, 1868), doc. 4, pp. 34.

[[21\]](#_ftnref21) ASGe, San Giorgio 112, Diversorum liber magnifici Officii dominorum Protectorum comperarum Sancti Georgii MCCCCLV, fol. 14r, where “Hinc est quod nos... nobiles et circumspectos viros laicos cives prefate civitatis Lucianum ac Babilanum de grimaldis, Guirardum et Paulum de Auria...”

[[22\]](#_ftnref22) ASGe, Archivio segreto 568, Diversorum cancellarie 1459–1460, entry dated 1459-03-15, where “Considerantes quedam esse in Ianuense civitate vitia ideo graviora et in conspectu divine maiestatis ut creditur detestabiliora quo vetustiora sunt et comuni quadam omnium patientia velut leviora tolerantur de quibus Ianuensis populus sepe admonitus sepe sanctorum predicatorum vocibus obiurgatus nondum videtur tamen his flagitiis frenum ac modum adhibuisse... creaverunt et constituerunt spectatos ac prestantes viros Petrum de Montenigro, Iulianum Spinulam quondam Carlotii, Ludovicum de Francis de Burgaro et Babilanum Grimaldum quondam Tome censores morum ad compescenda eiusmodi peccata...”; see Michele Rosi, “Le monache nella vita genovese dal secolo XV al XVII,” *Atti della società ligure di storia patria* 1ª serie, 27 (1895), pp. 18–9.

[[23\]](#_ftnref23) ASGe, Notai antichi 718, Bartolomeo Risso, filza 4, series I, nr. 251, dated 1455-12-23, where “Enricus de Podio civis Ianue quondam Thome... vendidit et titulo venditionis dedit cessit tradidit et mandavit seu quasi Benedicto Italiano civi Ianue... quandam sclavam ipsius Enrici vocatam Melicha ectatis annorum XVIII in circa de progenie Albanensium...”; this contract is also described in Laura Balletto, “Schiavi albanesi a Genova nel XV secolo,” in *Οι Αλβανοί στο Μεσαίωνα* (Αθηνα: Ινστιτούτο Βυζαντινών Ερευνών, 1998), p. 331.

[[24\]](#_ftnref24) ASGe, Notai antichi 720, Bartolomeo Risso, filza 6, nr. 344 (formerly nr. 345), dated 1456-04-07, where “Enricus de Podio civis Ianue quondam Tome... vendidit et titulo vendicionis dedit cessit tradiddit et mandavit seu quasi Pancracio Falamonice civi Ianue... sclavas duas ipsius Enrici unam videlicet vocatam Maria ectatis annorum viginti octo in circa de progenie Burgarorum et alteram vocatam Magdalena ectatis annorum quindecim in circa de progenie Burgarorum...”

[[25\]](#_ftnref25) ASGe, Notai antichi 720, Bartolomeo Risso, filza 6, nr. 353, dated 1456-06-02, in which Enrico de Podio sold the enslaved Lucia for 170 Genoese lire to be paid in the interest from shares (*paghe)* of the Casa di San Giorgio; see description in Gioffrè, *La schiavitù in Liguria*, p. 274.

[[26\]](#_ftnref26) Tria, *La schiavitù in Liguria*, p. 155.

[[27\]](#_ftnref27) ASGe, San Giorgio 1072, Officii Sancti Georgii introitus et exitus 1416, fol. 262r.

[[28\]](#_ftnref28) ASGe, Notai antichi 764, Bernardo de Ferrari, filza 1, series I, nr. 110, dated 1450-08-31, where “Iulianus de Fornariis alter procurator Benedicti Italiani ut constat publico instrumento... ad petendum habendum et exigendum recipiendum et recuperandum pro ipso constituente et eius nomine et vice ab Ambrosio Squarciafico omnem quantitatem pecunie...”; see edition in Philip Argenti, *The Occupation of Chios by the Genoese and Their Administration of the Island, 1346–1566. Volume III* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1958), doc. 91, pp. 573–4.

[[29\]](#_ftnref29) San Giorgio 27001, Caratorum veterum, anno 1445, fol. 61v, described in Jong-Kuk Nam, *Le commerce du coton en Méditerranée à la fin du Moyen Age* (Leiden: Brill Academic Publishers, 2007), p. 316.

[[30\]](#_ftnref30) ASGe, Notai antichi 921, Lorenzo Calvi, filza 1, series I, nrs. 88a and 97a, dated 1453-11-21 and 1453-12-18, respectively, where “Guliermus Lambardi de Onlanda, omni modo, iure, via et forma quibus melius et validius fieri et esse potest, fecit et sollemniter constituit suum certum nuncium et procuratorem legitimum nobilem Gasparem de Auria... ad petendum, habendum, exigendum, recipiendum et recuperandum... a Nicolao Gentile et bonis eius quam a Benedicto Italiano et bonis eius et a curatoribus eorum quam etiam a navi ducta et patronizata alias per dictum condam Nicolaum, alias per dictum Benedictum, causa et occasione soldorum et seu stipendiorum suorum...” and likewise for “Petrus Forco de Finari...”; see editions in Ausilia Roccatagliata, ed., *Notai genovesi in oltremare. Atti rogati a Chio 1453–1454, 1470–1471* (Genova: Istituto di paleografia e storia medievale, 1982), docs. 46 and 53, pp. 75–6, 86–7.

[[31\]](#_ftnref31) Vigna, *Codice diplomatico delle colonie Tauro-Liguri. Tomo primo*, pp. 774–6.

[[32\]](#_ftnref32) ASGe, Manoscirtti 849, Caffa. Estratti dall’Archivio di San Giorgio, entry nr. 85, dated 1458-01-31, where “Simile instrumentum cessionis factum est pro Martino Iustiniano olim Nigro fideiussore prenominati Caroli Catanei pro florenis ducentis de summa librarum CXXXXI et soldarum V pagarum de LVI per eum solutarum, et ei datum est extractum in papiro... Benedetto Italiano quondam Tommasino...”

[[33\]](#_ftnref33) ASGe, Notai antichi 729, Oberto Foglietta, filza 9, nr. 30, dated 1464-01-14; see Eliyahu Ashtor, *Levant Trade in the Later Middle Ages* (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1983), p. 481; Jacques Heers, “Le royaume de Grenade et la politique marchande de Gênes en Occident (XVe siècle),” *Le Moyen Âge* 4e série, 12 (1957), p. 105; Id., *Gênes au XVe siècle*, pp. 301, 313–4; see also ASGe, Archivio segreto 577, Diversorum cancellarie 1463–1464, entry dated 1464-11-29 for additional commercial activity in and around the port of Alexandria.

[[34\]](#_ftnref34) ASGe, Notai antichi 949, Bartolomeo Canessa, filza 1, nr. 184 (formerly nr. 176), dated 1466-06-15; ASGe, Archivio segreto 1799, Litterarum regestri 1461–1468, entry nr. 870, dated 1476-12-12...; see also Antonio Gallo, *Commentarii de rebus Genuensium et de navigatione Columbi*, ed. Emilio Pandiani (Città di Castello: Scipione Lapi, 1911), pp. 17–19; Giuseppe Pessagno, “Questioni colombiane,” *Atti della società ligure di storia patria* 1ª serie, 53 (1926), p. 608; Giovanna Petti Balbi, “Le relazioni tra Genova e la Corona d’Aragona dal 1464 al 1478,” in *Atti del primo congresso storico Liguria-Catalogna* (Bordighera: Istituto Internazionale di Studi Liguri, 1974), p. 472; Clara Fossati, “Da Genova a Barcellona. L’intinerario di Antonio Gallo,” *Itineraria* 13 (2014), p. 34; Jacques Heers, *Gênes au XVe siècle. Activités économiques et problèmes sociaux* (Paris: S.E.V.P.E.N., 1961), pp. 412 and 469.

[[35\]](#_ftnref35) ASGe, San Giorgio 33712, Cartularium cabelle marinariorum anni de MCCCCLXXXII, fol. 51v, where “Benedictus Italianus promisit Baptiste Cataneo consulli ut supra pro dicto Ambrosia patrono pro toto viagio...”; see transcript in Maria Luisa Balletto, ed., *Navi e navigazione a Genova nel Quattrocento. La Cabella marinariorum* (Bordighera: Istituto internazionale di studi liguri, 1973), p. 62.

[[36\]](#_ftnref36) ASCGe, Manoscritti 26, Origine e fasti delle nobili famiglie di Genova, fol. 597r; ASCGe, Manoscritti 47, Famiglie nobili di Genova DVCCI, fol. 237v; see also Diego Orlando, ed., *Un codice di leggi e diplomi siciliani del medio evo chi si conserva nella biblioteca del comune di Palermo* (Palermo: Tipografico-Librario, 1857), p. 124.

[[37\]](#_ftnref37) ASGe, Notai antichi 719, Bartolomeo Risso, filza 5, series I, nr. 181, dated 1457-06-22, where “Benedictus Italianus civis Ianue... vendidit et titulo vendicionis dedit cessit tradidit mandavit seu quasi Catarinete uxor quondam Antonii Grilli licet absenti ac michi notario etc... quandam sclavam ipsius Benedicti vocatam Melicha de progenie Alabanensium ectatis annorum XVIIII in circa...”

[[38\]](#_ftnref38) ASGe, Notai antichi 718, Bartolomeo Risso, filza 4, series I, nr. 251, dated 1455-12-23, where “Enricus de Podio civis Ianue quondam Thome... vendidit et titulo venditionis dedit cessit tradidit et mandavit seu quasi Benedicto Italiano civi Ianue... quandam sclavam... vocatam Melicha ectatis annorum XVIII in circa de progenie Albanensium... et est dicta sclava quam ipse Benedictus alias anno de MCCCCLV die XXIII decembris titulo empcionis acquissivit ab Enrico de Podio...”.

[[39\]](#_ftnref39) ASGe, Notai antichi 577, Antonio Fazio, filza 3, series I, nr. 79, dated 1432-07-07, see description in Geo Pistarino, “Tratta di schiavi tra Genova e la Spagna nel secolo XV,” *Medievalia* 7 (1987), p. 130; Onofre Vaquer Bennàsar, *L’esclavitud a Mallorca, 1448–1500* (Mallorca: Institut d’Estudis Baleàrics, 1997), pp. 62–3.

[[40\]](#_ftnref40) ASGe, Notai antichi 896, Tommaso Duracino, filza 9, nr. 157, dated 1466-04-10, where “Antonius de Canobio coyrasarius quondam Iacopi sponte et ex certa scientia per se et heredes suos se obligando vendidit et titulo et ex causa vendicionis dedit et consignavit Galcerano Adret de Falceto mercatori catalano Ianue commoranti... quendam sclavum dicti Antonii nominatum Demetrius de progenie Burgarorum ectatis annorum viginti vel circa... pro precio et finito precio librarum octuaginta Ianuinorum monete currentis quas dictus Antonius confitetur habuisse et recepisse a dicto Pancratii Gentilis bancherii de ratione ipsius Galcerani...”

[[41\]](#_ftnref41) ASCGe, Manoscritti 56, Delle nobili famiglie genovesi libro secondo, fol. 433r; ASCGe, Manoscritti 441, Memorie della città di Genova e di tutto il suo dominio 1437–1464, fol. 291r.

[[42\]](#_ftnref42) ASGe, Archivio segreto 571, Diversorum cancellarie 1461, fols. 7v–8r, entry dated 1461-01-27; see Giustina Olgiati, “Battista di Goano, politico del Quattrocento genovese,” *La storia dei genovesi* 12 (1994), pp. 152–3.

[[43\]](#_ftnref43) Agostino Giustiniani, *Annali della repubblica di Genova*, ed. Giovanni Battista Spotorno (Genova: Presso il libraio Canepa, 1854), pp. 420–3.

[[44\]](#_ftnref44) ASGe, San Giorgio 117, Negociorum gestorum Officii Sancti Georgii 1462–1467, fol. 60v, where it notes “et quorum dominorum designatorum protectorum anni predicti de MCCCCLXIIII nomina sunt hec videlicet Alexander Spinula quondam Opicini, Salvaigus de Vivaldis, Pancratius Gentilis, Bardasar Lomelinus, Bardasar Adurnus, Bendinellus Sauli, Baptista de Albaro lanerius et Christoforus de Salvo notarius...”

[[45\]](#_ftnref45) Heers, *Gênes au XVe siècle*, p. 626.

[[46\]](#_ftnref46) ASGe, Archivio segreto 2774C, Materie politiche 1400–1730, entry dated 1466-12-05; see Emilio Marengo, *Genova e Tunisi (1388–1515): relazione storica* (Genova: Società ligure di storia patria, 1901), p. 78.

[[47\]](#_ftnref47) ASGe, Archivio segreto 586, Diversorum cancellarie 1467–1468, fol. 60r–v, entry dated 1467-11-28; see Giovanna Petti Balbi, *Governare la città: pratiche sociali e linguaggi politici a Genova in età medievale* (Firenze: Firenze University Press, 2007), pp. 338–9.

[[48\]](#_ftnref48) ASCGe, Manoscritti 441, Memorie della città di Genova e di tutto il suo dominio 1437–1464, fol. 272v; ASCGe, Manoscritti 442, Memorie della città di Genova e di tutto il suo dominio 1465–1493, fol. 19r; Heers, *Gênes au XVe siècle*, p. 120.

[[49\]](#_ftnref49) ASGe, Notai antichi 916, Giovanni Danove, filza 1, series II, nr. 169, dated 1469-03-25, where “Odoardus Lavellus quondam Iohannis suo proprio nomine... quondam Isolte filie quondam Iofredi de Castello et uxor dicti quondam Iohannis Lavelli matris ipsius Odoardi... vendidit et titulo et ex causa vendicionis dedit cessit tradidit et mandavit seu quasi Astelano olim servo Iacopo de Corsio et Caterine uxor dicti Astelani olim serve quondam Bartholomei de Podio... quandam ipsius Odoardi suo et dicto nomine domum sitam Ianue... pro pretio et finito pretio librarum centum Ianuinorum monete currentis quas dictus Odoardus suo et dicto nomine confessus fuit et confitetur habuisse et recepisse a dictis Astelano et Caterina in peccunia numerata videlicet a Cristoforo de Podio...”; see also Laura Balletto, “Stranieri e forestieri a Genova: schiavi e manomessi (secolo XV),” in *Forestieri e stranieri nelle città basso-medievali* (Firenze: Salimbeni, 1988), p. 279.

[[50\]](#_ftnref50) ASGe, Notai antichi 648, Branca Bagnara, filza 1, series I, nr. 150, dated 1427-03-20, where “Bartholomeus Cataneus quondam Antonii civis Ianue... locavit et titulo locacionis dedit et concessit Baptiste de Bargalio calsolari civi Ianue... quandam famulam seu servam ipsius Bartholomei vocatam Ellena de progenie Tartarorum etatis annorum viginti vel circa...”

[[51\]](#_ftnref51) ASGe, Notai antichi 508, Branca Bagnara, register 3, 1426–1428, fols. 143r–144r, entry dated 1427-07-07, where “Baptista de Bargallio calsolarius civis Ianue locavit et titulo locationis dedit et concessit Francischo Salvaygo civi Ianue filio Alaoni maiori annis viginti quinque... quandam famulam seu servam ipsius Baptiste vocatam Ellena de progenie Tartarorum etatis annorum viginti vel circa...” The contract stated that Francesco had recently reached the age of majority and that his father was present during the enactment of the lease. This contract is also mentioned briefly in Balletto, “Stranieri e forestieri a Genova: schiavi e manomessi”, p. 269.

[[52\]](#_ftnref52) The Salvago were a *nobiles* albergo that absorbed the Celesia, Cibo, Nepitello, Porco, Porrata, Saliceto, Scotto (in part, some branches were absorbed into the Lomellini), Stroppa, and Stregino families into their *albergo* during the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries. See Ascheri, *Notizie storiche intorno alla riunione delle famiglie in alberghi in Genova*, pp. 25–8.

[[53\]](#_ftnref53) Jacques Heers, *Esclaves et domestiques au Moyen Âge dans le monde méditerranéen* (Paris: Arthème Fayard, 1981), pp. 219–20.

[[54\]](#_ftnref54) ASGe, Notai antichi 648, Branca Bagnara, filza 1, series I, nr. 188, item dated 1427-07-22, where “Bartholomeus Cataneus quondam Antonii civis Ianue vendidit et titulo et ex causa vendicionis dedit et tradidit Valentini Garigi de Barchinonia... quendam sclavam ipsius Bartholomei nominatam Ellenam de progenie Bulgarorum etatis annorum viginti duorum in circa...”; see also Geo Pistarino, “Tratta di schiavi tra Genova e la Spagna nel secolo XV,” *Medievalia* 7 (1987), pp. 130 and 140.

[[55\]](#_ftnref55) ASGe, Notai antichi 666, Branca Bagnara, filza 19, series I, nr. 192b–c, dated 1428-08-31, among many others; see Renée Doehaerd, “Chiffres d’assurances à Gênes en 1427–1428,” *Revue belge de philologie et d’histoire* 27 (1949), pp. 753–5; Id. and Charles Kerremans, eds., *Les relations commerciales entre Gênes, la Belgique et l’Outremont d’après les Archives Notariales Génoises* (Bruxelles: Institut Historique Belge de Rome, 1952), pp. 541, 544, 555, 574, and 594.

[[56\]](#_ftnref56) Federigo Melis, *Origini e sviluppi delle assicurazioni in Italia* (Roma: Istituto nazionale della assicurazioni, 1975), p. 246.

[[57\]](#_ftnref57) ASGe, Notai antichi 509, Branca Bagnara, register 4, 1429–1431, fol. 331r, entry dated 1431-12-08, where “Bartholomeus Cataneus quondam Anthonii civis Ianue... Manfrede uxore quondam Iohannis de Oliverio... dare et solvere et seu dari et solvi facere realiter et cum effectu, infra menses septem proxime venturos florenorum centum Ianuinorum... si quedam sclava dicte Manfrede vocata Cristina etatis annorum viginti duorum vel circa nunc pregnans sue gravida menses quinque vel circa de partu suo et dicta eius pregnatione et occasione ipsius partus et pregnationis salva et viva evaserit...”. This is an insurance contract valued at 100 Genoese lire. For an in-depth examination of this form of insurance for enslaved women, see Chapter 7.

[[58\]](#_ftnref58) SAO, Southampton Corporation, SC 5/4/1, Petty Customs Book, fols. 19r–23r, entries nr. 262, 263, 266, 269, 271, 273, 275–278, dated between December 1427 and February 1428, detail the activity of Bartolomeo; see Robert Florys, *The Port Books of Southampton, or Accounts of Robert Florys, Water-Bailiff and Receiver of Petty Customs, AD 1427–1430*, ed. Paul Studer (Southampton: Cox and Sharland, 1913), pp. 43–51; Angelo Nicolini, “Navi e mercanti savonesi in Inghilterra e nelle Fiandre, 1371–1460,” *Atti e memorie della società savonese di storia patria* 2ª serie, 38 (2002), p. 69.

[[59\]](#_ftnref59) ASGe, Archivio segreto 1781, Litterarum registri 1431–1434, entry nr. 896, dated 1432-10-11; see Jacques Heers, “Inventaire des documents conservés aux archives de Gênes relatifs a l’histoire de France au XVe siècle,” *Annuaire. Bulletin de la Société de l’histoire de France* 85 (1952), p. 69.

[[60\]](#_ftnref60) ASCGe, Manoscritti 17, Famiglie di Genova antiche e moderne. Tomo IV, parte II. Lettera C, fol. 134r; ASCGe, Manoscritti 54, Famiglie genovesi, fol. 29r.

[[61\]](#_ftnref61) ASGe, Notai antichi 843, Antonio Foglietta, filza 1, series I, nr. 148 (formerly nr. 154), dated 1456-07-20, where “Cipriano de Vivaldis, civi Ianue, quondam domini Pauli... nomine suo proprio ac nomine et vice nobilis domini Bartholomei Catanei...” see the edition in Antonio Foglietta, *Gênes et l’Outre-mer: actes notariés rédigés à Chypre par le notaire* Antonius Folieta, ed. Michel Balard, Laura Balletto, and Catherine Otten-Froux (Nicosie: Centre de Recherche Scientifique, 2016), doc. 164, pp. 396–7.

[[62\]](#_ftnref62) Mario del Treppo, *I mercanti catalani e l’espansione della corona d’Aragona nel secolo XV* (Napoli: L’arte tipografica, 1972), pp. 470–2; see also Louis Boiteux, *La fortune de mer, le besoin de sécurité et les débuts de l’assurance maritime* (Paris: S.E.V.P.E.N., 1968), p. 90.

[[63\]](#_ftnref63) ACAr, Cancillería, registro 2754, fol. 122v; see Maria-Mercè Costa Paretas, “La pau del 1428 i els mercaders genovesos de la Corona d’Aragó,” *Anuario de estudios medievales* 10 (1980), p. 568.

[[64\]](#_ftnref64) ASGe, Archivio segreto 1779, Litterarum registri 1427–1431, fols. 194r–195v, entry dated 1429-07-30; see Enrico Basso, “Pirati e pirateria a Genova nel Quattrocento,” *La storia dei genovesi* 11 (1991), p. 342; Id., *Genova. Un impero sul mare* (Cagliari: Istituto sui rapporti italo-iberici, 1994), p. 233.

[[65\]](#_ftnref65) ASGe, Archivio segreto 1780, Litterarum registri 1428–1437, fol. 69v, entry nr. 266, dated 1433-10-22, which the governor proclaims “Et presertim privilegio cuiusdam laudis que colligitur in loco Turtuxie ad quam laudem cuncti Ianuenses immunes et franchi esse debent... Quorum Ianuensium nomina sunt... Franciscus Salvaigus...” See Raffaele di Tucci, “Nuovi documenti e notizie sul genovese Antonio Malfante, il primo viaggiatore europeo nell’Africa occidentale (1477),” *Bollettino della società geografica italiana* 6ª serie, 9 (1934), pp. 199–200; and the edition in Id, *Il genovese Antonio Malfante: la famiglia, la vita, l’esplorazione del Sahara nel 1447* (Bologna: Licinio Cappelli, 1935), pp. 45–8.

[[66\]](#_ftnref66) AHCB, Correspondència, Lletres closes 1435–1436, fol. 96v; see Lluís Marquès Camós Cabruja, “Historia dramática de una embajada barcelonesa en Italia en 1435,” *Boletín de la Real Academia de Buenas Letras de Barcelona* 25 (1953), p. 26; Antonio Era, “Momenti delle relazioni tra Genova e Barcellona intorno al 1435 (Battagli di Ponza),” in *IV Congreso de Historia de la Corona de Aragón. Actas y comunicaciones I* (Palma de Mallorca: Gráficas Miramar, 1959), p 184. For a succinct narrative of the Battle of Ponza, see Alan Ryder, *Alfonso the Magnanimous: King of Aragon, Naples, and Sicily, 1396–1458* (New York: Oxford University Press, 1990), pp. 200–9.

[[67\]](#_ftnref67) Agustí Durán Sanpere, “Un document català de la revolta de Gènova de 1435,” *Boletín de la Real Academia de Buenas Letras de Barcelona* 8 (1915–1916), pp. 395–9.

[[68\]](#_ftnref68) ASGe, San Giorgio 27001, Caratorum veterum, anno 1445, where Gourdin notes that he was attested as shipping goods from Cadiz in six separate entries in 1445; see Philippe Gourdin, “Présence génoise en Méditerranée et en Europe du Nord au milieu du XVe siècle: l’implantation des hommes d’affaires d’après un registre douanier de 1445,” in *Coloniser au Moyen Âge*, ed. Michel Balard and Alain Ducellier (Paris: Armand Colin, 1995), pp. 24–6; as well as Nam, *Le commerce du coton en Méditerranée*, pp. 316–7 who notes that Francesco was involved in the cotton trade in Cadiz and had made a shipment on the vessel of Girolamo Cattaneo (referring to fol. 127v of San Giorgio 27001).

[[69\]](#_ftnref69) ASGe, Archivio segreto 547, Diversorum cancellarie 1450–1451, fols. 143v–148v, which references an earlier entry dated 1449-10-17 which notes the “consilium dominorum Antianorum in legitimo numero congregatum, quorum tunc presentium hec sunt nomina... Franciscus Salvaigus...”; see Gabriella Airaldi, ed., *Genova e Spagna nel secolo XV: il «Liber damnificatorum in regno Granate»* (Genova: Università di Genova, 1966), doc. 16, pp. 131–2.

[[70\]](#_ftnref70) ASGe, Archivio segreto 555, Diversorum cancellarie 1454, fol. 43r–v, entry dated 1454-03-29, where “spectatum Officium Monete in legitimo numero congregatum quorum qui interfuerunt hec sunt nomina Franciscus Salvaigus...”; see Giustina Olgiati, *Classis contra regem Aragonum (Genova, 1453–1454). Organizzazione militare ed economica della spedizione navale contro Napoli* (Cagliari: Istituto sui rapporti italo-iberici, 1990), doc. 27, pp. 457–9.

[[71\]](#_ftnref71) ASGe, San Giorgio 111, Liber diversorum negotiorum spectabilis Officii dominorum Protectorum comperarum Sancti Georgii MCCCCLIII, fol. 3r, entry dated 1453-11-21, with “Ex dominis protectoribus de L primo... Meliadux Salvaigus surrogatus loco Francisci Salvaigi...”; ASGe, Manoscritti 680, Leggi e ordini per la città di Famagosta, entry dated 1452-01-11, with “quorum dominorum sex protectorum qui affuerunt nomina sunt hec... Franciscus Salvaigus...”; ASGe, San Giorgio 114, Negociorum gestorum Officii Sancti Georgii 1457, fol. 1r, entry dated 1457-01-10, with “cuius officii nomina protectorum, qui his affuerunt, sunt hec videlicet... Franciscus Salvaigus prior...”

[[72\]](#_ftnref72) ASGe, Archivio segreto 569, Diversorum cancellarie 1460–1461, fol. 90v, entry dated 1460-10-31, where “pro mercibus Venetorum que in galeacia naufraga erant... quorum officialium hec sunt nomina... Batista de Bargalio...”; see Laura Balletto, “Nel porto di Genova (1460–1461),” in *Genova Mediterraneo, Mar Nero* (Genova: Civico istituto colombiano, 1976), pp. 50–1.

[[73\]](#_ftnref73) Alberto and Branislava Tenenti, *Il prezzo del rischio: l’assicurazione mediterranea vista da Ragusa, 1563–1591* (Roma: Jouvence, 1985), p. 371.

[[74\]](#_ftnref74) Florence Edler de Roover, “Early Examples of Marine Insurance,” *The Journal of Economic History* 5, no. 2 (1945), pp. 172–200.

[[75\]](#_ftnref75) ASPr, Fondo Datini, busta 853, inserto 22, codice 118566, dated 1400-03-13. English translation from De Roover, “Early Examples of Marine Insurance,” p. 197.

[[76\]](#_ftnref76) Quentin van Doosselaere, *Commercial Agreements and Social Dynamics in Medieval Genoa* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2009), p. 193; De Roover, “Early Examples of Marine Insurance,” p. 190.

[[77\]](#_ftnref77) Louis Boiteux, “Contribution de l’assurance a l’histoire de l’économie en France,” in Les *sources de l’histoire maritime en Europe, du Moyen Age au XVIIIe siècle*, ed. Michel Mollat (Paris: S.E.V.P.E.N., 1962), pp. 452–3.

[[78\]](#_ftnref78) van Doosselaere, *Commercial Agreements and Social Dynamics in Medieval Genoa*, pp. 205–7.

[[79\]](#_ftnref79) ASGe, Notai antichi 589, Antonio Fazio, filza 15, nr. 302, dated 1453-11-02; see description in Gioffrè, *Il mercato degli schiavi a Genova nel secolo XV*, p. 303.

[[80\]](#_ftnref80) Melis, *Origini e sviluppi delle assicurazioni in Italia*, p. 6.

[[81\]](#_ftnref81) See Figure 7 on page 93 for the distribution of men and women buyers by social category in the dataset of 222 life insurance contracts.

[[82\]](#_ftnref82) In network terminology the ties instantiated by these contracts increase the density of the network, represented by the ratio of actual to potential connections.

[[83\]](#_ftnref83) In network terminology the ties instantiated by these contracts increase the size of the network, represented by the total number of nodes.

[[84\]](#_ftnref84) ASGe, Notai antichi 888, Tommaso Duracino, filza 1, series I, nr. 124, dated 1453-09-10: “Infrascripti asecuratores... per infrascripta quantitatem pecuniam se obligato... confessus fuerunt et confitentur in veritate publice recognoverent et recognoscent... Andree Gentilis civis Ianue... habuisse et recepisse, tantam quantitatem suarum rerum et mercium bonarum et mercantilium... cum effectu hinc ad menses tres proxime venturos... Baldasar Lomelinus libras septuaginta quinque Ianuinorum... si quedam sclava dicti Andree nomine Cita de progenie Avogaxiorum seu cuiusvis alterius progeniei existat ectatis annorum triginta quinque in circa nunc gravida seu pregnans mensium octo in circa, de partu suo et dicta eius pregnacione... salva et viva evaxerit, tunc et eo causa presens instrumentum sit cassum irritum et nullum...”

[[85\]](#_ftnref85) ASCGe, Manoscritti 54, Famiglie genovesi, fol. 74r; on the marriage of Andrea and Clarisia, see Giovanna Petti Balbi, “I maonesi e la maona di Corsica (1378–1407): un esempio di aggregazione economica e sociale,” *Mélanges de l’École française de Rome. Moyen Âge, temps modernes* 93 (1981), p. 169.

[[86\]](#_ftnref86) ASGe, Archivio segreto 1779, Litterarum registri 1427–1431, fols. 194r–195v. See Basso, “Pirati e pirateria a Genova nel Quattrocento”, pp. 332–3.

[[87\]](#_ftnref87) ASGe, Notai antichi 666, Branca Bagnara, filza 19, nr. 802, item dated 1431-04-07, see doc. 683 in Renée Doehaerd and Charles Kerremans, eds., *Les relations commerciales entre Gênes, la Belgique et l’Outremont d’après les Archives Notariales Génoises* (Brussels: Institut Historique Belge de Rome, 1952), p. 517.

[[88\]](#_ftnref88) ACAr, Cancillería, registro 2583, fol. 26v; ARVa, Real Cancillería, registro 233, fol. 168r, entry dated 1431-11-12, see doc. 59 in Alvaro Santamaria Arández, *Aportación al estudio de la economía de Valencia durante el siglo XV* (Valencia: Instituto Valenciano de Estudios Históricos, 1966), p. 208; Mercedes Costa, “La pau del 1428 i els mercaders genovesos de la Corona d’Aragó”, p. 568; Treppo, *I mercanti catalani e l’espansione della corona d’Aragona*, p. 368.

[[89\]](#_ftnref89) ASGe, Archivio segreto 716, Diversorum cancellarie, Officum monete 1426–1509, entry dated 1431-04-07.

[[90\]](#_ftnref90) ASGe, Antico comune 753, Galearum introitus et exitus MCCCCXXXV, small sheet inserted and bound at fol. 23r, dated 1436-05-27, which names “Testes Andreas Gentilis et d. Thomasius Caraffa ac d. Guillelums Raimondus…” See the edition in Aldo Agosto, “Gli elenchi originali dei prigionieri della battaglia di Ponza,” *Atti della società ligure di storia patria* 2ª serie, 12, no. 2 (1972), pp. 403–46. On the Battle of Ponza, see Era, “Momenti delle relazioni tra Genova e Barcellona intorno al 1435”, pp. 173–92; Vito Vitale, “La relazione di Biagio Assereto sulla battaglia di Ponza,” *Bollettino ligustico per la storia e la cultura regionale* 5, no. 4 (1954),
 pp. 99–104.

[[91\]](#_ftnref91) ASGe, Archivio segreto 543, Diversorum cancellarie 1449, fols 53v–54r, entry dated 1449-05-05. For details on the gabelles and tensions between Aragonese and Genoese merchants, see Giustina Olgiati, “Angelo Giovanni Lomellino: attività politica e mercantile dell’ultimo podestà di Pera,” *La storia dei genovesi* 9 (1989), pp. 160–3.

[[92\]](#_ftnref92) ASGe, Archivio segreto 547, Diversorum cancellarie 1450–1451, fols. 227v–229v, dated 1451-11-15, see Airaldi, ed., *Genova e Spagna nel secolo XV*, doc. 23.

[[93\]](#_ftnref93) ASGe, Notai antichi 903, Tommaso Duracino, filza 16, nr. 914 (formerly nr. 924), dated 1473-12-16: “Baldasar Lomelinus civis Ianue quondam Stephani... recognovit et recognoscit... Filipi de Camila quondam Catanei... emisse habuisse et recepisse tantam quantitatem suarum rerum et mercium bonarum et mercantilium... cum effectu hinc ad menses tres proxime venturos libras ducentas septuagintaquinque Ianuinorum... si quedam sclava dicti Philipi nominata Magdalena de progenie Zichorum ectatis annorum decemnovem vel circa, nunc gravida seu pregnans mensium octo vel circa, de partu suo et de dicte eius gravidacione pregnacione et partu... salva et viva evaserit quod tunc et eo casu presens instrumentum sit cassum irritum et nullum....”

[[94\]](#_ftnref94) ASCGe, Manoscritti 54, Famiglie genovesi, fol. 74r; Napoleone Lomellini was the most prominent member of the family during the late fourteenth and early fifteenth century, not only for the magnitude and extent of his commercial activities, but also for the large number of offspring that he produced. ASLSP, Manoscritti 333, busta 11, Nota degli individui della famiglia Lomellini, item 3, Albero della discendenza di Napoleone Lomellini, traces his ancestry down to the nineteenth century. See also Yoko Kamenaga-Anzai, “The Family Consciousness in Medieval Genoa. The Case of the Lomellini,” *Mediterranean World* 19 (2008), pp. 149–51.

[[95\]](#_ftnref95) ASGe, San Giorgio 24014, Liber Officii provisionis Romanie, 1424–1428, fol. 93v, entry dated 1427-01-20. See edition in Laura Balletto, ed., Liber Officii Provisionis Romanie: Genova, 1424–1428 (Genova: Università di Genova, 2000), docs. 210–211, pp. 236–8. See also Nicolae Iorga, ed., “Notes et extraits pour servir à l’histoire des croisades au XVe siècle: IV. Documents politiques. Partie II,” *Revue d’orient Latin* 5 (1897), p. 366; Nicolae Banescu, *Le déclin de Famagouste. Fin du royaume de Chypre. Notes et documents* (Bucharest: Institut roumain d’études byzantines, 1946), pp. 73–4.

[[96\]](#_ftnref96) ASGe, San Giorgio 101, Decretorum Officii Sancti Georgii 1436, fol. 34r, naming “Cataneus de Camilla” as one of the eight *protectores* of the Casa di San Giorgio for 1436.

[[97\]](#_ftnref97) ASGe, San Giorgio 114, Negociorum gestorum Officii Sancti Georgii 1457, fol. 142v, entry dated 1460-12-01, where “elegerunt infrascriptos octo in protectores dictarum comperarum anni MCCCCLXprimi… Filippus de Camilla…”; ASGe, San Giorgio 115, Litterarum Officiorum diversorum 1457, fol. 23r, entry dated 1461-02-02, where “Magnifici domini protectores in integro numero congregati, et quorum qui his affuerunt nomina sunt hec… Filippus de camilla…”; Ibid., fol. 157r, entry dated 1469-05-07, where “Gregorius Lercarius subrogatus loco Philippi de Camilla…”, that is, with Gregorio Lercari acting as surrogate for Filippo while he was on embassy to Rome; Ibid, fol. 238r, entry dated 1475-02-28, which names “D. Filippus de Camilla prior”; also see Angelo de Stefani, “Degli ordinamenti del 1475 sulla pesca del corallo a Bonifazio,” *Archivio storico italiano* 4ª serie, 12 (1883), p. 323, which contains a transcript of regulations regarding coral fishing in Corsica, dated 1475-12-07, that also names Filippo as the prior of the “protectores comperarum Sancti Georgii.”

[[98\]](#_ftnref98) ASGe, San Giorgio 2436, Litterarum Officii Sancti Georgii 1466–71, fol. 227v, dated 1469-04-17: “nobili et prestanti conciui et college nostro philippo de camilla, ut nostro nomine apud sanctitatem domini nostri requirat fieri super bullis estate superiore concessis legati caphensibus reformationes in supplicatione per eum nostro nomine deponenda ordinate declarandas…”

[[99\]](#_ftnref99) Ibid., fols. 232v (Borgia), 246v (Bessarion), and 247r (Calandrini). See also Konstantinos Vetochnikov, “La politique religieuse des autorités génoises vis-à-vis de la métropole de Caffa (Crimée, 15ème siècle),” in *Réduire le schisme? Ecclésiologies et politiques de l’Union entre Orient et Occident (XIIIe–XVIIe siècle)*, ed. Marie-Hélène Blanchet and Frédéric Gabriel (Paris: Association des Amis du Centre d’histoire et civilisation de Byzance, 2013), pp. 270–2.

[[100\]](#_ftnref100) ASGe, San Giorgio 2888, Primi cancelliere 85, letter dated 1491-11-08, naming “Philipus de Camilla” as ambassador to Rome for the Casa di San Giorgio.

[[101\]](#_ftnref101) ADGGe, Fondo Giustiniani 1, Conventiones insule Chii inter comune Ianue et Iustinianos tomus I, fol. 239v, entry dated 1483-06-26, see doc. 127 in Antonella Rovere, ed., *Documenti della maona di Chio: secc. XIV–XVI* (Genova: Società ligure di storia patria, 1979), p. 377. The *Officium 1444* was a council of eight men that advised the protectors of San Giorgio on a number of issues, particularly regarding the liquidation of accounts and the management of gabelles. The members were generally former protectors and served for terms spanning five or more years. See Heers, *Gênes au XVe siècle*, pp. 121–2, who suggests that this office provided a layer of long-term administrative stability to San Giorgio.

[[102\]](#_ftnref102) ASGe, Notai antichi 720, Bartolomeo Risso, filza 6, nr. 285, item dated 1454-02-15 identifies Gentile as the brother of Filippo. ASGe, San Giorgio 36846, Massaria Caffae 1467, fols. 37r–39r: the two *masserie* for the year starting 11 January 1467 were named as “Gentilis de Camilla… Iohannes Rensus de Cabella…”

[[103\]](#_ftnref103) ASGe, San Giorgio 36849, Caffae massaria 1468, fol. 370r: names “Gentilis de Camilla” as consul of Caffa to serve from 1 February 1468 to 11 February 1469. A marble plaque uncovered in the nineteenth century by archaeologists in Caffa and currently housed in the Odessa Archaeological Museum reads “OPUS MAGNIFICI DNI GENTILIS DE CAMILLA CONSULIS CAFFE MCCCCLXVIII”; see Elena Skrzinskaja, “Inscriptions latines des colonies génoises en Crimée (Thédosie-Soudak-Balaklava),” *Atti della società ligure di storia patria* 1ª serie, 56 (1928), p. 69.

[[104\]](#_ftnref104) ASGe, San Giorgio 36850, Caffae massaria 1469, fols. 4r–7r: names “Gentilis de Camilla… Alaonus de Auria” as the two *masserie* for the year starting 28 February 1469. On his role and duties as masserius, see Amadeo Vigna, ed., *Codice diplomatico delle colonie Tauro-Liguri durante la signoria dell’ufficio di S. Giorgio. Tomo II, parte II* (Genova: Società ligure di storia patria, 1879), pp. 778–9.

[[105\]](#_ftnref105) ASGe, San Giorgio 37860, Officii Sarzane expense. C. 1484, fol. 26r; ASGe, San Giorgio 37865, Officii expensarum guerre contra Florentinos. M. 1485, fol. 1r.