# Chapter 7 The risk economy of slavery: slaveholding and the insurance of the enslaved

This chapter examines an important event in the life cycle of enslavement: life insurance for pregnant enslaved women. The contracts that recorded this insurance offer insights into several of the perils faced by enslaved women in late medieval and early modern Genoa and the Mediterranean in general. The peril of death through childbirth was a constant concern for women—both enslaved and free women—who had become pregnant, and these women faced a possible loss of life with every pregnancy. The holders of enslaved women had different concerns, namely, the possible loss of the enslaved as valuable property. Life insurance contracts for pregnant enslaved women were therefore developed with the intention of protecting slaveholders—not the enslaved—from this risk. The frequent pregnancies of these enslaved and unmarried women also reflected the perils of sexual exploitation visited upon them by their slaveholders and by other individuals of their extended kinship networks. The forced separation of enslaved women from their sons and daughters after childbirth, furthermore, represented another unique form of disruptive violence experience by enslaved women in late medieval Genoa.

The development of life insurance contracts for enslaved pregnant women expanded the scope of the economy of enslavement in late medieval Genoa. This form of insurance was recorded in specialized notarial contracts and the close study of these contracts further elucidates the complex network of capital exchange that characterized the Mediterranean economy of enslavement. The act of insuring enslaved women represented the exchange of social, financial, and human capital between slaveholders and underwriters. The overall picture reveals yet another aspect of the use and abuse of the enslaved across the entire life cycle of enslavement, illuminating the system whereby the extraction and accumulation of capital by merchant elites was predicated on the continuous exploitation of the bodies and labour of enslaved persons. This picture remains a grim one. There were nevertheless momentary possibilities for agency by the enslaved within this oppressive system, and the careful reading and analysis of insurance contracts provide additional brief insights into the lived experience of the enslaved through these moments.

## 7.1 The development of insurance in the late medieval Mediterranean

The insurance of enslaved persons in the late medieval era remains an understudied phenomenon and the subject has only briefly been addressed by historians of insurance and slavery in the Mediterranean world. The study of late medieval Mediterranean insurance has been largely dominated by regional studies, with a geographical emphasis on Florence and a topical emphasis on marine insurance.[[1\]](#_ftn1) The first attempt at a comprehensive history of late medieval insurance that addressed slavery was made in the late nineteenth century by Enrico Bensa, who classified insurance related to enslaved persons into two categories: property insurance and life insurance. Insurance on the forced migration of enslaved persons, on the travel of the enslaved with the slaveholder, and against the flight of the enslaved, were classified as forms of early property insurance, whereas insurance on pregnant enslaved women was classified as a nascent form of life insurance.[[2\]](#_ftn2) By comparing the language of these early contracts with the language of Genoese criminal law, Bensa argued insurance on pregnant enslaved women evolved from thirteenth century legal agreements between their holders and third parties who had been criminally charged with impregnating them. In these earlier agreements, the guilty party agreed to compensate the slaveholder for the value of the enslaved woman should she perish as a result of the forthcoming childbirth.[[3\]](#_ftn3) He also suggested that the new forms of life insurance that emerged in the modern era—especially life insurance for free pregnant women in seventeenth century Rome—evolved from this earlier form of insurance on enslaved women. In the early twentieth century Alexander Jack briefly considered the examples provided by Bensa and suggested the life insurance on enslaved women was a form of ‘gambling insurance,’ arguing that late medieval underwriters did not possess a sufficient understanding of risk analysis. These contracts were, in his interpretation, little more than mere bets against life and death. Jack did not, however, provide any evidence to support this assertion nor address the issue with any detail.[[4\]](#_ftn4) Domenico Gioffrè disputed the notion that insurance on pregnant enslaved women emerged from earlier contracts or statutory law. Since contemporary statutes already punished such transgressions by third parties on enslaved women, he argued that no additional contractual arrangement was required.[[5\]](#_ftn5) He instead suggested that the emergence of insurance for enslaved pregnant women was a novel development based on the recognition that her pregnancy represented a serious financial risk to the slaveholder. Gioffrè agreed with Bensa, however, that the large quantity of insurance contracts in fifteenth century Genoa was indicative of the persistent sexual exploitation of enslaved women by the men holding them in captivity.[[6\]](#_ftn6) The voluminous study of late medieval Italian insurance by Federigo Melis provides examples and transcriptions of insurance contracts relating to the shipping and flight of enslaved persons, although he provides little analysis on their contents.[[7\]](#_ftn7) He also argued against Bensa, contesting his claim that only enslaved women were insured against death from pregnancy in the later Middle Ages. Melis provided a transcript of a fifteenth century Genoese notarial act which showed that Fiamenga Spinola—the wife of Luca Gentile and member of a wealthy and prominent *nobiles* family—had been insured for 600 Genoese lire against the risk of death by pregnancy by a group of four Genoese merchants.[[8\]](#_ftn8) He also provided examples of this form of insurance enacted contemporaneously in Pisa and Florence. This suggested that insuring pregnant women against the risk of death was not just a Genoese practice but was common across the Italian peninsula. In his economic analysis of late medieval Genoese slavery, Domenico Gioffrè noted that the use of insurance contracts for pregnant enslaved women disappeared in the waning decades of the fifteenth century, having been replaced by one-to-one agreements, the so-called *apodixie* recorded in personal account registers. These private agreements, often negotiated and drawn up by specialized insurance brokers, did not require the meditation or certification of a notary.[[9\]](#_ftn9) He therefore argued that Genoese merchants dispensed with notarial contracts for insurance at the end of the fifteenth just as they had dispensed with notarial contracts for everyday commerce at the end of the thirteenth century.[[10\]](#_ftn10) Jacques Heers has provided the most detailed study of insurance and enslavement to date. He examined several insurance contracts on enslaved women to speculate on the relationships between these women and the men who held them in captivity, and also suggested these women were becoming pregnant at a disproportionately high rate as a result of sexual exploitation.[[11\]](#_ftn11) The recent work of Quentin van Doosselaere has examined the evolution of Genoese insurance contracts from the early fourteenth to middle fifteenth century. He argued that the dominance of *nobiles* alberghi networks on the commercial life of the city and its colonies resulted in a rapid increase in the quantity of all forms of insurance contracts. This proliferation occurred in tandem with their intentional shift as instruments to minimize financial risk towards instruments to consolidate network ties.[[12\]](#_ftn12) Van Doosselaere concluded that insurance was an unprofitable venture throughout the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries.

There had been no dedicated studies of life insurance on the enslaved until recent studies by Hannah Barker and Geoffrey Clark. Clark examined a collection of thirteen insurance policies on the lives of enslaved pregnant women enacted in Barcelona in the second half of the fifteenth century.[[13\]](#_ftn13) He suggests that further study of these contracts would demonstrate that they were not merely reflective of existing financial interests and existing social ties, but that they also were a means of building new socioeconomic ties.[[14\]](#_ftn14) This thesis will take up his suggestion in Chapter 8 through a detailed analysis of the insurance contracts enacted by the merchant Baldassare Lomellini to illustrate how this underwriter used insurance on enslaved women to consolidate existing and instantiate new socioeconomic ties. Hannah Barker examines insurance contracts on enslaved pregnant women in fifteenth century Genoa to suggest that they were reflective of the desire by slaveholders to sustain their patrilineage and “hedge their familial bets by having sex with enslaved women.”[[15\]](#_ftn15) This thesis will supplement the study of Barker through a close reading of the structure and content of this unique form of contract and will demonstrate its effectiveness as a window into the social world of Genoese enslavement during the fifteenth and early sixteenth century. This chapter will demonstrate that these contracts offer another means of understanding socioeconomic issues around the market economy of slavery, such as the relations between slavery, insurance, and usury; the pattens of slaveholding among various social groups; and the social bonds between Genoese merchants and enslaved women that they held. This study will also argue against the assertions of van Doosselaere and Barker that life insurance on enslaved women was an unprofitable enterprise. Instead, it will show that insurance was yet another means of capital accumulation in the complex mercantile networks of late medieval Genoa.

## 7.2 Insurance as fictitious sale

The insurance contract for enslaved women was structured as a fictitious sales agreement during the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, unlike later forms of insurance that openly specified the premium and the coverage. In a fictitious sale, the purchaser of insurance functioned as the seller of some unspecified quantity of merchandise and the underwriter functioned as the buyer for this merchandise. In the spring of 1470, for example, the widowed Nicolosia Aspirano, who was the spouse of the deceased lawyer Andrea de Benigassio, purchased insurance from the underwriter Giovanni de Marini.[[16\]](#_ftn16) The insurance was intended to protect Nicolosia from the financial loss should an enslaved woman named Maddalena—a thirty-five year old Russian who was four months pregnant—pass away as a result of childbirth. This was the intention of the contract. The actual wording of the contract begins as follows:

> Giovanni de Marini, citizen of Genoa, son of the deceased Luchino, with certain knowledge has confessed and confesses... to me, the aforementioned notary... acting in the name of Nicolosia, the wife of the deceased Andrea de Benigassio[[17\]](#_ftn17)... to have acquired and received a quantity of goods and merchandise from her...

The underwriter Giovanni, as such, acknowledged the receipt of an unspecified quantity of valuable merchandise from Nicolosia. For this merchandise Giovanni agreed to pay Nicolosia the amount of 200 Genoese lire at a future date that was seven months from the date of the contract:

> For this quantity of goods and merchandise... Giovanni solemnly promises, on behalf of himself and his heirs... to give and hand over to Nicolosia... two hundred Genoese lire after the passage of seven months...

The notary then cleverly used the termination clause to transform the fictitious sale into an insurance contract. The termination clause was a standard feature in commercial contracts that allowed a transaction to be canceled under certain conditions. In this case, the contract would have been canceled should the enslaved Maddalena—who was being held by Nicolosia and who also happened to be pregnant—have remained healthy during and after her pregnancy.

> ... if the enslaved Russian named Maddalena, who is being held by Nicolosia, and who is about thirty-five years old and now pregnant for about four months... remain alive and healthy during and after her pregnancy or childbirth... then the present contract shall be null and void...

In this case, the ‘sale’ for the quantity of goods would be declared null and void should the enslaved Maddalena remain healthy. The underwriter Giovanni would therefore not be required to pay the widowed Nicolosia the 200 Genoese lire for the unnamed goods, which would also have to be returned (assuming that they were exchanged in the first place). If the enslaved Maddalena had, however, passed away during the seven months from the enactment of the contract from complications relating to her pregnancy or childbirth, then the ‘sale’ remained valid and Nicolosia would have received the two hundred lire payment for the unnamed quantity of goods. The point of this obfuscation was to the keep the participants, in particular the underwriter, safe from accusations of usury.[[18\]](#_ftn18) The concerns of ecclesiastics against usury were generally focused on the grammatical ‘subject’ of commercial agreements—the lender in the case of loans, the underwriter in the case of insurance—whom they saw as having received ‘something for nothing’ in the form of interest or premium payments. The fictitious sale transformed the underwriter from the subject to the indirect object of the contract—to the buyer of the unspecified quantity of goods—and thus turned scrutiny away from the practice of underwriting. The purchaser of the insurance was the subject to whom an ecclesiastical evaluation of usury would have been applied. But as the fictitious subject of the fictitious sale, the purchaser either received nothing for the quantity of ‘goods’ or broke even if the termination clause was invoked. This contractual circumlocution might come across as unconvincingly duplicitous to the modern reader, but it was generally sufficient to avoid accusations of usury in late medieval Genoa.[[19\]](#_ftn19)

The insurance contracts for pregnant enslaved women were also unique within the overall realm of late medieval insurance in another way: a single underwriter generally provided the coverage. There were some exceptions. In the summer of 1467, for example, the tailor Agostino de Cazerio purchased insurance against the risk of death from childbirth from the underwriters Giovanni de Marini and Leonardo di Negro. The insurance was for an enslaved Circassian woman named Caterina, who was about seven months pregnant, and had a term of four months.[[20\]](#_ftn20) Each underwriter pledged the amount of 100 lire for a total coverage of 200 Genoese lire. This use of multiple underwriters was relatively rare in insurance contracts for enslaved pregnant women: only four percent of the contracts examined for this study specified two or more underwriters. This represents a considerable divergence from every other form of insurance contract in late medieval Genoa, particularly commercial insurance contracts, which were generally underwritten by a coalition of several insurers.[[21\]](#_ftn21)

## 7.3 Underwriters of insurance for enslaved women

Individuals from the *nobiles* families and alberghi were the primary figures that participated in the insurance of pregnant enslaved women. This might not seem like much of a surprise but given the vigorous participation of men and women from *artefices* and *mercantes* families in the sales and leasing markets of the enslaved demonstrated in Chapter 4,[[22\]](#_ftn22) their negligible participation in purchasing and underwriting life insurance on enslaved women requires additional consideration. In his study of Genoese maritime insurance contracts of the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, Quentin van Doosselaere noted the similar dominance of the *nobiles* families in the underwriting of commercial voyages. He also suggested that this activity was unprofitable—or marginally profitable at best—for the underwriters. This suggestion led him to conclude that the act of underwriting was more than a commercial activity: it was also a social activity that served to create and strengthen social ties amongst the *nobiles* alberghi. Van Doosselaere suggested, furthermore, that the strengthening of this network dominated by prominent *nobiles* merchants curtailed the ability for outsiders (that is, the *mercantes*, the *artefices*, and foreign merchants) to participate in this activity.[[23\]](#_ftn23) His conclusions stand in opposition to the earlier analyses of Jacques Heers, who asserted that the merchants who underwrote these contracts—even those who belonged to prominent *nobiles* families and alberghi—were figures of marginal importance. The insurance market, in the analysis of Heers, represented a commercial space for minor financiers to make minor profits. He named Gaspare Spinola and Giovanni di Negro as particular examples of minor financiers, stating that they were outsiders who were not participants in the larger business ventures undertaken by their respective alberghi.[[24\]](#_ftn24) A brief examination of the commercial and political activity of these two individuals, however, reveals a very different story.

Gaspare Spinola was an active participant in commerce from the Black Sea and the eastern Mediterranean.[[25\]](#_ftn25) He was resident in Pera in the winter of 1452 working alongside his relative Tommaso Spinola. Tommaso had close connections to Ottoman commercial networks through his father-in-law Francesco de Draperiis, who was a trusted confidant of the Ottoman sultan Mehmet II.[[26\]](#_ftn26) In the testament of Tommaso, Gaspare was identified as a former *burgensis* of Caffa, and he was named the heir to several houses, a vineyard, and a soap company in Pera, as well as an unspecified quantity of jewels.[[27\]](#_ftn27) He still resided in Pera in the early months of 1453 but had relocated to Chios by the start of 1454—most likely as a result of the social disorder caused by Mehmet II’s conquest of Constantinople—where he remained for the next three years.[[28\]](#_ftn28) Gaspare kept himself busy in Chios with numerous commercial ventures between 1455 and 1456, including a major commercial partnership with the Genoese merchants Napoleone Vivaldi, Prospero and Domenico Pellerano, Serafino Fazaben and Gregorio Magnone.[[29\]](#_ftn29) By early 1457 he had returned to Genoa, where he was named as the procurator for Giovanna de Corsanego, the sister of bishop Gregory of Trebizond, in the testament for her deceased father Antonio de Corsanego.[[30\]](#_ftn30) It was at this time that Gaspare began to underwrite insurance for the holders of enslaved women in Genoa, enacting several contracts between 1457 and 1460.[[31\]](#_ftn31) He also purchased an enslaved woman, a twenty-year old Circassian named Maria, soon after his return to the city.[[32\]](#_ftn32) Gaspare continued to participate in eastern Mediterranean affairs after his return to Genoa through the time-honoured method of procuration. In the autumn of 1457, for example, he named Benedetto Salvago as his representative in the colony of Chios to disperse of some assets that he had left on the island.[[33\]](#_ftn33)

Giovanni di Negro—much like Gaspare Spinola—was also an active and well-connected participant in overseas commerce. He represented his albergo in England as a mercantile agent between the years 1447 to 1450, residing in the neighbourhood of Broad Street and Bishopsgate in London. This neighbourhood was the central locale for Italian merchants in the city and the location of four houses owned by the di Negro family.[[34\]](#_ftn34) Giovanni in particular was involved in several commercial ventures between Genoa, England and the Low Countries. In the spring of 1449, for example, he was recorded in a partnership involving the transport of a large quantity of wool, soap, cumin, and olive oil from Seville to Flanders.[[35\]](#_ftn35) He returned to Genoa sometime after 1450. He was selected to serve a one-year term as a *consilarius* to the Casa di San Giorgio in the autumn of 1453—a position that gave him an important advisory role in the financial affairs of the bank.[[36\]](#_ftn36) He was also serving on the *Officium mercantie* by the early months of 1454. This was a powerful and influential office that regulated commerce in the port of Genoa and arbitrated disputes between merchants, artisans, and guilds. These concurrent appointments probably kept him busy while allowing him to consolidate important contacts for his albergo. In the spring of 1454, for example, Giovanni was involved in a dispute between the longshoreman’s guild and the woad dyer’s guild for the rights to unload cargo originating beyond the borders of republic of Genoa.[[37\]](#_ftn37) A few months later he participated in the selection of officials for Caffa and other Black Sea colonies that had recently come under the administration of the Casa di San Giorgio.[[38\]](#_ftn38) He was also present in early September to relate the news delivered to the *protectores* and the members of the *consilarium* relating the unsuccessful attack on Caffa by Mehmet II.[[39\]](#_ftn39) One week later Giovanni was appointed by doge Pietro Campofregoso to the *Officium ad inquirendas civium facultates*, an office established to reform the Genoese tax system, although he was replaced by Filippo Cattaneo after a few weeks of service.[[40\]](#_ftn40) He would continue to accept positions related to the administration of the eastern slaving zones from 1456 onwards, which was also his most active period of insuring pregnant enslaved women. Giovanni served another term in the *consilarium* of the Casa di San Giorgio in 1457, where he again participated in the selection of officials for the Black Sea colonies.[[41\]](#_ftn41)

The activities of both Gaspare Spinola and Giovanni di Negro belie the assumption of Heers that they were marginal figures. Although they did not serve in the most powerful position—as *protectores* of the Casa di San Giorgio—they were nevertheless quite active in both commerce and political administration. Both men engaged in long-distance trade and seemed aware of the crucial importance of maintaining commercial interests in the slaving zones of the eastern Mediterranean. This summary of their activity during their time as insurers—a summary by no means exhaustive or complete—suggests that they were relatively important and active figures within their alberghi who worked to continuously cultivate networks of influence across the Mediterranean world. Their practice of insuring pregnant enslaved women shows that this activity was not the space of minor local actors. There was more to this activity than small and short-term profit.

## 7.4 The coverage and term of insurance

The *corpus* of insurance contracts on enslaved women detailed the legal rights and responsibilities of the primary transactors, that is, the slaveholder who purchased the insurance and the underwriter. The language shifted from the socioeconomic sphere to the legal sphere with a series of clauses that outlined the coverage of the insurance and the mechanics by which it happened. The enslaved women of these insurance contracts were named in the *corpus* as part of a cancellation clause: as persons whose health served to validate or negate the contract. They were not named in the protocol as they were for sales and leasing contracts, being neither subjects nor objects, superficially, of the contractual arrangement.

### Describing value and temporal coverage

The first clause in the *corpus* reiterated the relationship between the notary, the underwriter, and the insured, concluding with the agreement of the underwriter to hand over a specified quantity of money as payment for the fictional sale at some specified future date. This payment represented the monetary amount of coverage provided by the underwriter, while the future date was specified as several months from the date of enactment of the contract. In the autumn of 1456, for example, the underwriter Giovanni Battista Grimaldi agreed to pay two hundred Genoese lire to Paolo de Franchi, expressed as a fictional sale of “a quantity of goods and merchandise” and which actually represented the insured value of an enslaved Circassian woman named Caterina, who was about eight months pregnant. The contract specified that Paolo be reimbursed in three months’ time: that is, the contract had a three month term, after which time the insurance would expire.[[42\]](#_ftn42) In another contract from the spring of 1468, the underwriter Baldassare Lomellini agreed to pay two hundred lire to Argenta Cicala, the widow of Tommaso Interiano, in four months’ time. This was a fictional sale that represented insurance on an enslaved Circassian woman named Maddalena, who was about seven months pregnant.[[43\]](#_ftn43) The duration of time specified for payment was proportional to the stage of pregnancy: approximately the time from the expected date of delivery for the enslaved women plus a month or two, as illustrated in Figure 35 on page 189.

[ image 703004A1.svg ]

Figure 32: Average sale price denoted in sales contracts vs. average insured value denoted in life insurance contracts related to enslaved women, 1400–1510. Compiled from the sample of 632 sales contracts and 222 insurance contracts.

Figure 32 illustrates that the average insured value of enslaved women in insurance contracts was closely correlated to their average sale price in sales contracts. The chart nevertheless reveals a growing divergence between the average insured value and average sale value as the fifteenth century progressed which corresponds to similar findings by Hannah Barker.[[44\]](#_ftn44) The reason for this divergence was the disproportionate insuring of enslaved Circassians, who were the most expensive enslaved women in sales contracts. Figure 33 illustrates this disproportionate insurance by comparing the ratios of enslaved women by regional provenance in sales and insurance contracts. Circassian women were the objects of approximately twenty percent of sales contracts but nearly thirty-seven percent of insurance contracts. At first glance it might appear that Circassians were becoming pregnant at greater rate than enslaved women of other Mediterranean regions, but that was not likely the case. A more compelling explanation is that the slaveholders simply valued them more, and as such, were more likely to purchase insurance to protect them against the economic loss that death would incur.

[ image 703005A3.svg ]

Figure 33: The regional provenance of enslaved women in sales and life insurance contracts, 1400–1510. Compiled from the dataset of 632 sales contracts and 222 insurance contracts.

### Describing the enslaved and stage of pregnancy

A notable aspect of the life insurance contract for enslaved women was the absence of any mention of the enslaved in the *protocol* of the act. In this form of insurance as fictional sale, the enslaved woman was not the indirect object of the contract as she had been in sales and leasing contracts. The ostensible indirect object of the contract was instead the unspecified sum of merchandise and money that exchanged hands between the underwriter and the purchaser.[[45\]](#_ftn45) The enslaved was not declared until the end of the *corpus*, in the clause introduced by the Latin phrase *salvo et specialiter reservato* that outlined the means by which insurance contracts could be negated.[[46\]](#_ftn46) The naming of the enslaved woman followed the pattern present in sales and leasing contracts but with additional information regarding the stage of her pregnancy.[[47\]](#_ftn47) The contract thus identified her by name, the person holding her, her estimated age, and her regional provenance, along with two additional qualifications: that she was currently pregnant and an estimate of the stage of her pregnancy, expressed in months. An insurance contract enacted in the spring of 1441, for example, identified the enslaved Margarita as follows:

> the slave of the aforementioned Cattaneo, named Margarita, about seventeen years of age, now pregnant for about four months... [[48\]](#_ftn48)

The contract identified Margarita as held by the merchant Cattaneo Grillo, who was also the purchaser of the insurance, estimated that she was approximately seventeen years old, and that she had been pregnant for about four months. The estimation of the state of pregnancy was almost always declared in months, although there were a few instances where it was estimated to the half-month. In the autumn of 1454, for example, the merchant Gabriele de Rapallo purchased insurance from the underwriter Damiano Giustiniani for an enslaved Tatar woman named Caterina, who was declared to be about two and a half-months pregnant.[[49\]](#_ftn49) These more accurate assessments of the stage of pregnancy—which were always made by the slaveholder and not the enslaved—might indicate a greater likelihood that these particular women had been sexually exploited and impregnated by their holders. In some cases, the stage of the pregnancy was omitted from the contract, but the declaration regarding the actual pregnancy of the woman was always included.[[50\]](#_ftn50) In the winter of 1453, for example, the notary Giovanni de Valegia purchased insurance from the underwriter Basilio Axinela for an enslaved Russian woman named Maria. The enacting notary Tommaso Duracino indicated that Maria was pregnant and that the contract would reimburse the slaveholder should she pass away as a result of her pregnancy or childbirth, but he left a blank space where he would have normally recorded the stage of pregnancy.

Figure 34 illustrates the distribution of ages of enslaved women in life insurance contracts enacted in Genoa between the years 1400 and 1510. This discrete distribution is presented as a standard histogram with a bin size of three years: a value chosen to reflect the fact that the transactors of these contracts were known to be estimating the ages of these enslaved women.[[51\]](#_ftn51) The central tendency measures indicate that twenty years was the most common default estimate for enslaved pregnant women, with the median estimate being quite higher at twenty-six years and the mean estimate at approximately twenty-six and a half years. Most insurance contracts were enacted for women between the ages of twenty and thirty, with a sharp drop off after the age of thirty. The positive skewing of the distribution indicates a sudden spike in insurance activity beginning with adulthood and again, as with the distributions seen in sales contracts, it also suggests that the estimates of the age of these enslaved women were probably slightly lower than their actual age. The innate tendency, or preference, in sales contracts to agree upon a lower estimated age for the enslaved therefore persisted throughout the life cycle of enslavement. This statistical trend was to the benefit of the slaveholder, who was able to retain this low-end estimation from the date of sale in order to obtain a higher price if he or she should decide to sell the enslaved woman in the future. The distribution also illustrates that some children were also becoming pregnant. In the winter of 1458, for example, the merchant Agostino Zucca purchased insurance from the underwriter Giacomo Grimaldi for the enslaved Tatar child named Lucia, who was declared to be just sixteen years of age.[[52\]](#_ftn52) Although the pregnancy of enslaved children was rather uncommon, it sometimes happened and this sexual abuse of enslaved minors represented another peril faced by young enslaved women in late medieval Genoa.

[ image 703009A1.svg ]

Figure 34: Age distribution of enslaved women in life insurance contracts, 1400–1510. From the dataset of 222 contracts for enslaved women recorded by Genoese notaries.

Following the identification of the enslaved woman, the contract would then state that should she remain healthy and alive for a specified amount of time—before, during, and after her pregnancy—then the contract was null and void. After a successful childbirth and healthy recovery, the underwriter was thus freed from the obligation of paying the coverage to the buyer of insurance specified in the previous clause.[[53\]](#_ftn53) This clause was concluded with a boilerplate statement indicating that the contract was null and void after one year regardless of the outcome of the pregnancy. This means that if the enslaved woman had passed away during the insured period, then the purchaser had to make their claim within one year after the enactment of the contract to collect the insurance payout. In the cases where the stage of pregnancy or term of insurance was not indicated, this clause implicitly denoted a term of insurance for one year.

The declaration of the term of coverage was closely correlated to the length of time that the enslaved woman had been pregnant. The further along the pregnancy, the shorter the term of coverage. Figure 35 illustrates that the coverage provided by the underwriter was roughly proportional to the length into pregnancy of the enslaved woman. In most contracts, the duration of coverage was sufficient to provide insurance for the enslaved woman against the risk of death during the later months of pregnancy, for the act childbirth itself, and for a short recovery period of after childbirth.

[ image 703006A2.svg ]

Figure 35: Correlation of the duration of insurance coverage with time into pregnancy, in months. Compiled from the dataset of 222 insurance contracts enacted during the period 1400–1510.

The data indicates that the recovery period protected by insurance averaged just over two months. The contract was thus structured so that the payment for the fictional sale was conducted, on average, on a date about two months after the expected date of delivery. The central tendency measures indicated that most women were insured approximately six and a half months into their pregnancy and for average span of just over four months.

Figure 36 illustrates the distribution of the stage of pregnancy for enslaved women in life insurance contracts enacted in Genoa between the years 1400 and 1510. This discrete distribution is presented as a standard histogram with a bin size of one month: a value chosen to reflect the fact that the transactors of these contracts were known to be estimating the stage of pregnancy. The central tendency measures indicate that eight months was the most common default estimate for the term of pregnancy, with the median estimate being seven months and the mean estimate at approximately six and a half months. The negative skewing of the distribution indicates that well over half of slaveholders of enslaved pregnant women waited until the third trimester to purchase insurance.

[ image 703010A1.svg ]

Figure 36: Distribution of the stage of pregnancy for enslaved women in life insurance contracts 1400–1510. Compiled from the dataset of 222 insurance contracts.

This raises the following question: why did slaveholders wait until the final months of the pregnancy—often into the ninth month—before they insured the women in their possession? The premium on a longer-term contract would have likely been greater than shorter term contract, a trend that is seen in the analysis of modern life insurance.[[54\]](#_ftn54) The lack of an openly specified premium in these contracts, however, makes it difficult to conclusively verify this assertion. The highest probability of death from pregnancy and childbirth, furthermore, occurred at the moment of delivery, and therefore is unlikely that the amount of the premium would have been sufficiently greater to deter insurance at an earlier stage. It might also be the case that slaveholders simply did not know that the women they held were pregnant until the third trimester. This could have been the consequence of general ignorance or indifference on behalf of the slaveholder. It could also be possible that the enslaved woman was deliberately concealing her pregnancy. The concealment of pregnancy was a common occurrence in the medieval and early modern period, particularly by women who had been sexually abused and did not want to raise the resulting child. There are numerous cases during the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries of women concealing pregnancy for part of the term until they could obtain an abortion, or concealing pregnancy for the entire term and delivering the newborn to a foundling home, or in some drastic situations, committing infanticide afterwards.[[55\]](#_ftn55) In Florence, as mentioned earlier, twenty-two percent of children abandoned at the Ospedale di San Gallo between 1430 and 1439 were the offspring of enslaved women.[[56\]](#_ftn56) It is not difficult to ascribe similar motives to enslaved women in Genoa who might have wanted to conceal their pregnancies in order that they might be able to terminate them at some point, thus saving their offspring from a life of enslavement and abuse.

## 7.5 Premiums, usury, and the profitability of insurance

Insurance contracts on enslaved women took the form of a fictional sale in order to evade suspicions of usury. The insurance premium—the amount paid by the slaveholder for the insurance—was represented in the contract as the exchange of an unspecified quantity of merchandise in a fictional sale, making it difficult for the historian to determine the exact amount of the premium. There were some cases, however, where the premium was indirectly specified through related documents. In the spring of 1422 an enslaved Russian woman named Margarita testified that she had become pregnant while in Chios by her holder, the commercial broker Pietro de Columnis, who had afterwards sold her to the merchant Paolo Ihorlo. Pietro agreed to pay Paolo the sum of three lire and eighteen soldi in Genoese currency for insurance against death from childbirth, a sum that was provided by his colleague Pietro de Mari.[[57\]](#_ftn57) In the summer of 1426, the merchant Giovanni Asterio likewise agreed to pay Lodisio Antonio Cattaneo for insurance against the risk of death from childbirth for an enslaved woman named Lucia. The contract stated that she had become pregnant by Giovanni and because of his actions he was obligated to pay Lodisio the sum of three Genoese lire for the insurance.[[58\]](#_ftn58) In the winter of 1457, the account books of the fifteenth century merchant Giovanni Piccamiglio recorded the receipt of three lire and four soldi in Genoese currency in order to purchase insurance for an enslaved woman named Pomellina. The payment was made by the herb merchant Domenico Toto, who was most likely the man who had impregnated Pomellina, and this payment provided for coverage of one hundred and fifty lire against the risk of death from childbirth.[[59\]](#_ftn59) The register of the *cabella securitatorum*—the tax applied to insurance transactions—for the year 1485 likewise recorded the premium paid for an insurance contract on an enslaved woman of two-and-a-half Genoese lire for one hundred lire of coverage.[[60\]](#_ftn60) These four examples are concatenated in Table 7 below.

Table 7: Deduced premiums on life insurance contracts for enslaved women, 1422–1485.

| Example                         | Date       | Coverage                       | Premium     |          |
| ------------------------------- | ---------- | ------------------------------ | ----------- | -------- |
|                                 |            |                                | absolute    | relative |
| *Testifacio* of Margarita       | 1422-04-30 | est. 120 lire [[61\]](#_ftn61) | 3 lire 18 s | 3.25%    |
| *Obligatio* of Giovanni Asterio | 1426-06-17 | est. 120 lire                  | 3 lire      | 2.5%     |
| Receipt from Domenico Toto      | 1457-03-23 | 150 lire                       | 3 lire 4 s  | 2.1%     |
| *Cabella securitatorum*       | 1485-10-07 | 100 lire                       | 2 lire 10 s | 2.5%     |

These results, albeit brief, suggest that the holder of a pregnant enslaved woman who wished to purchase insurance against death from childbirth would expect to pay a premium of roughly three to four percent of the total coverage. The relative values of these premiums are analogous to the premiums paid for marine insurance during the fifteenth century.[[62\]](#_ftn62) These relatively low premiums, furthermore, raise the question of the profitability of the life insurance on enslaved women. Recall that Quentin van Doosselaere considered the business of underwriting insurance during this era as unprofitable, or at best a break-even proposition.[[63\]](#_ftn63) And certainly this might appear to be the case with insurance contracts for enslaved women, with relatively low premiums for insurance against what appeared to be a high-risk event. To evaluate whether this form of insurance was profitable, it is first necessary to determine, by a reasonable estimate, the upper and lower bounds for the rates of death from childbirth in the late Middle Ages. The popular image of everyday life in these centuries was one fraught with persistent and omnipresent danger, especially for pregnant women. Death resulting from pregnancy was seen as an inevitable risk, one that was commonplace, and which could not be avoided. The links between cleanliness and health that emerged in the early modern era, along with the development of the germ theory of disease,[[64\]](#_ftn64) resulted in a slow but continuous decline in this phenomenon during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.[[65\]](#_ftn65) The only comprehensive pre-modern data set on maternal mortality in Europe dates from Sweden, where the recording of births and deaths began in the middle of the eighteenth century. Two aspects of the data stand out. The rate of death by childbirth is relatively constant during this century, reflecting the lack of knowledge concerning germ theory, and the average is about one thousand deaths per one hundred thousand live births, or about one percent of pregnancies.[[66\]](#_ftn66) Late medieval Italy was a much different place than eighteenth century Sweden, however, so this lower bound is certainly less than the rate of death by childbirth during the period of this study. The determination of an upper bound or worst-case scenario—in which nothing at all is done to avert maternal death—can be set from the recent scientific consensus which posits a “natural maternal mortality” rate of one thousand and five hundred deaths per one hundred thousand live births, or approximately one-and-a-half percent of pregnancies.[[67\]](#_ftn67)

This analysis will dispense any optimism concerning medieval medical progress and assume the worst-case scenario: that the rate of death resulting from pregnancy is equivalent to the natural maternal mortality of one and a half percent. This may seem like a rather small proportion upon superficial examination, especially for the historian imbued with lurid accounts of medieval death. It is nevertheless significantly greater than that rate in modern Europe—about 125 times greater or a differential of eighteen thousand percent—a significant and appreciable difference. This number is in accordance with the studies of maternal mortality in medieval England made by Rachel Podd, who critiques the trope of “the historical horror of childbirth” and notes that claims of extremely high mortality rates in the premodern era are not supported by quantitative data.[[68\]](#_ftn68) It is also in close accordance with the maternal mortality rate of 14.4 per 1000 births calculated by David Herlihy and Christiane Klapisch-Zuber for fifteenth century Florence.[[69\]](#_ftn69)

Applying this value of natural maternal mortality to the insurance sources on enslaved women, the underwriter would have had to pay out the covered quantity about one-and-a-half percent of the time; that is, an expected payment one-and-a-half Genoese lire for each one hundred lire insured. If the data collected in Table 7 is representative for these types of contracts—and there is no compelling reason to assume that it is not—then the underwriter would have received an average profit of about one lira per contract. This was a modest sum, and at first glance it serves to support van Doosselaere’s assertion that underwriting insurance was a marginally profitable business at best. Enacting these contracts was, however, a quick and straightforward process. Insurance contracts on enslaved women were amongst the shortest and most concise contracts enacted by fifteenth century Genoese notaries. They required only two witnesses—like sales and leasing contracts—and only a minimal number of notarial formulae. There was no supporting documentation required and, furthermore, the enacting notary often served as the procurator for both the underwriter and purchaser of the insurance, freeing them from having to physically convene during the enacting of the contract. The foreign merchant Pellegro Sucha, for example, enacted forty-one life insurance contracts for enslaved women over the period of eighteen months. This would have provided him with an expected forty lire profit, a significant sum for the rather limited quantity of work. The business of insuring pregnant enslaved women was nevertheless a small yet important aspect of the emerging overall insurance industry. The underwriter Antonio Interiano, for example, insured at least sixteen pregnant enslaved women between 1427 and 1431 as part of a larger insurance business consisting of three hundred and sixty-seven total contracts.[[70\]](#_ftn70)

The insurance of enslaved women was—on an item-per-item basis—a relatively low-profit endeavour, corresponding with the experience in the insurance business as a whole. Insurance was nevertheless a profitable venture for those who undertook the activity as their primary business, like Antonio Interiano. The underwriting of insurance in particular life insurance contracts for enslaved women, however, was not undertaken by individuals whose primary business activity was insurance. The small increments of financial capital collected as profit probably took a second seat to the social capital collected through the consolidation of network ties offered by these contracts for these merchants.

**

The standard story of insurance is that it was an invention of Italian merchants.[[71\]](#_ftn71) This is a debatable point and beyond the scope of this study. But the importance of insurance in the new regimen of financial instruments that transformed the economy of the late medieval Mediterranean world is not debatable. This chapter illustrates that the roots of modern life insurance were intricately linked with insurance on the lives of enslaved women and provides another instance of the close connections between the economics of Mediterranean slavery and the mechanics of early capitalism. These insurance contracts were also important in the accumulation of social capital by instantiating and strengthening social network ties. They were another means by which underwriters strengthened ties within their own albergo and with other *nobiles* alberghi. They were also instruments of influence for slaveholders from *artefices* and *mercantes* families to instantiate social ties with *nobiles* families: ties that might prove useful in the long-term success of their families and perhaps even contribute to their future admission into a *nobiles* albergo. The next chapter will consider how merchants used sales, leasing, and insurance contracts to expand and strengthen their social networks.

------

[[1\]](#_ftnref1) For Florence, see the seminal study of Guido Bonolis, *Svolgimento storico dell’assicurazione in Italia* (Firenze: Bernardo Seeber, 1901). On marine insurance, see Giulio Giacchero, *Storia delle assicurazioni marittime: l’esperienza genovese dal medioevo all’età contemporanea* (Genova: SAGEP, 1984), as well as the papers collected in Adrian Leonard, ed., *Marine Insurance: Origins and Institutions, 1300–1850* (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2016). There have been studies for other Mediterranean locales. For Iberia, see María Teresa Ferrer i Mallol and Arcadi Garcia i Sanz, *Assegurances i canvis marítims medievals a Barcelona* (Barcelona: Institut d’estudis catalans, 1983); Roser Salicrú Lluch, *Esclaus i propietaris d’esclaus a la Catalunya del segle XV: l’assegurança contra fugues* (Madrid: Institució Milà i Fontanals, 1998). For France, see Louis Boiteux, *La fortune de mer, le besoin de sécurité et les débuts de l’assurance maritime* (Paris: S.E.V.P.E.N., 1968).

[[2\]](#_ftnref2) Enrico Bensa, *Il contratto di assicurazione nel medio evo: studi e ricerche* (Genova: Tipografia marittima, 1884), pp. 130–1.

[[3\]](#_ftnref3) Luigi Tommaso Belgrano, Cornelio Desimoni, and Vittorio Poggi, eds., *Leges genuenses* (Torino: Officium Regia, 1901), col. 503; Bartolomeo de Bosco, *Consilia egregii domini Bartholomei de Bosco famosissimi iuris consulti genuensis* (Loano: Franciscum Castellum, 1620), consilium CXXXXVIII, describes this particular law along with a commentary by Bosco.

[[4\]](#_ftnref4) Alexander Jack, *An Introduction to the History of Life Assurance* (London: P. S. King, 1912), p. 202. Giovanni Ceccarelli also notes that late medieval underwriters lacked the modern actuarial tools for risk evaluation, but argues that they nevertheless made use of a form of “probabilistic reasoning” that allowed them to intuitively assess risk and take the necessary profits. See Giovanni Ceccarelli, “The price for risk-taking: marine insurance and probability calculus in the Late Middle Ages,” *Journal électronique d’histoire des probabilités et de la statistique* 3 (2007), p. 21–2. On the concept of ‘gambling insurance’, see Johan Huizinga, Homo Ludens*. A Study of the Play-Element in Culture* (Boston: Beacon Press, 1955), p. 53; Viviana Rotman Zelizer, *Morals and Markets: The Development of Life Insurance in the United States* (New York: Columbia University Press, 1979), pp. 67–73.

[[5\]](#_ftnref5) Domenico Gioffrè, “Note sull’assicurazione e sugli assicuratori genovesi tra medioevo ed età moderna,” *Atti della società ligure di storia patria* 2ª serie, 9, no. 1 (1969), p. 45.

[[6\]](#_ftnref6) Id., *Mostra storica del documento assicurativo del XIV–XVI secolo* (Genova: Centro di cultura e tecnica assicurativa, 1969), p. 31.

[[7\]](#_ftnref7) Federigo Melis, *Origini e sviluppi delle assicurazioni in Italia* (Roma: Istituto nazionale della assicurazioni, 1975),
 pp. 211–2.

[[8\]](#_ftnref8) ASGe, Notai antichi 648, Branca Bagnara, filza 1, series I, nr. 164, dated 1427-04-10. The insurers were Pietro de Mari (200 lire), Aimone Grimaldi (200 lire), Stefano Lomellini (100 lire), and Giovanni Grimaldi *quondam* Odoardo (100 lire). The valuation differential between the lives of the enslaved and free in the late medieval era requires additional research by historians of actuarial science.

[[9\]](#_ftnref9) Domenico Gioffrè, *Il mercato degli schiavi a Genova nel secolo XV* (Genova: Fratelli Bozzi, 1971), p. 99.

[[10\]](#_ftnref10) David Herlihy, *Pisa in the Early Renaissance: A Study of Urban Growth* (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1958), pp. 9–10. Notarial contracts continued to be used for major items of commerce well into the sixteenth century, such as the sale of real estate and enslaved persons.

[[11\]](#_ftnref11) Jacques Heers, *Esclaves et domestiques au Moyen Âge dans le monde méditerranéen* (Paris: Arthème Fayard, 1981), pp. 216–20.

[[12\]](#_ftnref12) Quentin van Doosselaere, *Commercial Agreements and Social Dynamics in Medieval Genoa* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2009), pp. 183–207.

[[13\]](#_ftnref13) These contracts were published without commentary in Madurell Marimón̦, José María. “Los seguros de vida de esclavos en Barcelona (1453–1523): documentos para su estudio.” *Anuario de historia del derecho español* 25 (1955), pp. 123–88.

[[14\]](#_ftnref14) Geoffrey Clark, “Slave Insurance in Late Medieval Catalonia,” in *Sicherheit in Der Frühen Neuzeit: Norm, Praxis, Repräsentation*, ed. Christoph Kampmann and Ulrich Niggemann (Köln: Böhlau Verlag, 2013), p. 428.

[[15\]](#_ftnref15) Hannah Barker, “The Risk of Birth: Life Insurance for Enslaved Pregnant Women in Fifteenth-Century Genoa,” *Journal of Global Slavery* 6, no. 2 (2021), p. 207.

[[16\]](#_ftnref16) ASGe, Notai antichi 900, Tommaso Duracino, filza 13, series II, nr. 215, dated 1470-04-19, where “Iohannes de Marinis civis Ianue quondam Luchini sponte et ex certa scientia confessus fuit et confitetur in veritate publice recognovit et recognoscit... Nicolosie uxor quondam domini Andree de Benigasio... habuisse et recepisse tantam quantitatem suarum rerum et mercium bonarum et mercantilium... cum effectu hinc ad menses septem proxime venturos libras ducentas Ianuinorum monete currentis... si quedam sclava dicte Nicolosie nominata Magdalena de progenie Rubeorum ectatis annorum triginta quinque vel circa nunc gravida seu pregnans mensium quatuor in circa de partu suo et de dicta eius gravidacione... salva et viva evaserit quod tunc et eo causa presens instrumentum sit cassum irritum et nullum...”

[[17\]](#_ftnref17) The surname of the widowed Nicolosia was not indicated in this contract. She was, however, identified as the daughter of Giorgio Aspirano and widow of Andrea de Benigassio in the procuration enacted in ASGe, Notai antichi 771, Battista Parisola, filza 5, series I, nr. 249, dated 1468-11-03.

[[18\]](#_ftnref18) The literature on usury is vast during this period and beyond the scope of this study. On usury and its relation to commercial contracts, see Benjamin Nelson, “The Usurer and the Merchant Prince: Italian Businessmen and the Ecclesiastical Law of Restitution, 1100–1550,” *The Journal of Economic History* 7 (1947), pp. 104–22; Amleto Spicciani, *Capitale e interesse tra mercatura e povertà nei teologi e canonisti dei secoli XIII–XV* (Roma: Jouvence, 1990); Francesco Galassi, “Buying a Passport to Heaven: Usury, Restitution, and the Merchants of Medieval Genoa,” *Religion* 22, no. 4 (1992), pp. 313–26.

[[19\]](#_ftnref19) For a description of fictional sales in this period from a legal history perspective, see Guido Rossi, “Civilians and Insurance: Approximations of Reality to the Law,” *Tijdschrift Voor Rechtsgeschiedenis* 83 (2015), pp. 333–7.

[[20\]](#_ftnref20) ASGe, Notai antichi 894, Tommaso Duracino, filza 7, series II, nr. 51, dated 1463-06-17, where “Iohannes de Marinis quondam Luchini et Leonardus de Nigro quondam Angeli sponte et ex certa scientia confessi fuerent et confitentur... Augustini de Cazerio sartoris... emisse habuisse et recepisse tantam quanitatem suarum rerum mercium bonarum et mercantilium... effectu hinc ad menses octo proxime venturos... Iohannes libras centum... et dictus Leonardus alias libras centum... si quedam sclava dicti Angeli nominata Lucia de progenie Zichorum ectatis annorum viginti duorum vel circa gravida seu pregnans mensium trium vel circa de partu suo et de dicta eius gravidacione et pregancione et occasione ipsius partus gravidacionis et pregnationis salva et viva evaserit quod tunc et eo casu presens instrumentum sit cassum irritum et nullum...”

[[21\]](#_ftnref21) Only 18 of 222 insurance contracts for enslaved women had multiple underwriters; in contrast, more than 85% of the approximately 2400 commercial insurance contracts underwritten by the merchant named Antonio Interiano between 1427 and 1431 specified two or more underwriters, see Melis, *Origini e sviluppi delle assicurazioni in Italia, p. 271.* See also Heers, *Esclaves et domestiques au Moyen Âge*, p. 219.

[[22\]](#_ftnref22) See the discussions beginning on page 90.

[[23\]](#_ftnref23) van Doosselaere, *Commercial Agreements and Social Dynamics in Medieval Genoa*, pp. 204–7.

[[24\]](#_ftnref24) Heers, *Esclaves et domestiques au Moyen Âge, pp. 219–20.* Heers names Giacomo di Negro, but the acts themselves specify Giovanni di Negro, son of the deceased Damiano*.* Laura Balletto arrives at the same conclusion about these persons, stating that they likely played an intermediary role between buyers of insurance and the “great Genoese men of business” serving as underwriters*.* See Laura Balletto*, “*Stranieri e forestieri a Genova: schiavi e manomessi (secolo XV*),” in Forestieri e stranieri nelle città basso-medievali, Quaderni di storia urbana e rurale (*Firenze: Salimbeni, 1988*), p. 2*73*.*

[[25\]](#_ftnref25) On Gaspare’s commercial activity in the eastern Mediterranean around the time of the conquest of Constantinople by Mehmed II, see Ausilia Roccatagliata, “Con un notaio genovese tra Pera e Chio nel 1453–1454,” *Revue des études sud-est européennes* 17 (1979), pp. 380–1; Geo Pistarino, “Cinquantacinque giorni a Pera-Galata nel tempo del’assedio di Costantinopoli (1453),” *Византийский Временник* 56 (1998), p. 173.

[[26\]](#_ftnref26) Geo Pistarino, *Genovesi d’oriente* (Genova: Civico istituto colombiano, 1990), p. 294.

[[27\]](#_ftnref27) ASGe, Notai antichi 701, Paolo de Recco, filza 6, series III, nr. 2, dated 1455-04-25. On the Spinola family in the eastern Mediterranean in the fifteenth century, see Laura Balletto, “I genovesi e la conquista turca di Costantinopoli (1453). Note su Tommaso Spinola e la sua famiglia,” Acta historica et archaeologica mediaevalia 26 (2005), pp. 795–834.

[[28\]](#_ftnref28) Geo Pistarino, *Chio dei genovesi nel tempo di Cristoforo Colombo* (Roma: Istituto poligrafico e Zecca dello Stato, 1995), pp. 252–3, 305; Gabriella Airaldi, *Studi e documenti su Genova e l’oltremare* (Genova: Università di Genova, 1974), pp. 160–1.

[[29\]](#_ftnref29) ASGe, Notai antichi 921, Lorenzo Calvi, filza 1, nrs. 160–166, 171–179, 181, 184, 185, 187, 190. See the editions of these contracts in Gian Giacomo Musso, “Nuovi documenti dell’Archivio di stato di Genova sui genovesi e il Levante nel secondo Quattrocento,” *Rassegna degli archivi di stato* 27, no. 2–3 (1967), pp. 443–96.

[[30\]](#_ftnref30) ASGe, Notai antichi 787, Andrea de Cairo, filza 13, item dated 1458-12-22. He also served as a procurator in a number of other agreements. On the Genoese Gregory, bishop of Trebizond, see Gabriella Airaldi, *Studi e documenti su Genova e l’oltremare*, (Genova: Università di Genova, 1974), pp. 158–75; Sergej Karpov, *L’impero di Trebisonda, Venezia, Genova e Roma 1204–1461* (Roma: Veltro Editrice, 1986), p. 211.

[[31\]](#_ftnref31) ASGe, Notai antichi 890, Tommaso Duracino, filza 3, series I, nr. 68, dated 1457-02-21; Ibid., Tommaso Duracino, filza 3, series I, nr. 80, dated 1457-03-05; Ibid., Tommaso Duracino, filza 3, series II, nr. 236, dated 1458-11-21; ASGe, Notai antichi 891, Tommaso Duracino, filza 4, nr. 30, dated 1459-01-23; Ibid., Tommaso Duracino, filza 4, nr. 360, dated 1459-07-04; Ibid., Tommaso Duracino, filza 4, nr. 407, dated 1459-08-02; ASGe, Notai antichi 892, Tommaso Duracino, filza 5, nr. 40, dated 1460-01-19, Ibid., Tommaso Duracino, filza 5, nr. 50 (formerly nr. 365), dated 1460-01-24.

[[32\]](#_ftnref32) ASGe, Notai antichi 719, Bartolomeo Risso, filza 5, series I, nr. 261, dated 1457-09-22; see description in Gioffrè, *Il mercato degli schiavi a Genova nel secolo XV*, p. 242.

[[33\]](#_ftnref33) ASGe, Notai antichi 848, Tommaso de Recco, filza 2, series I, nr. 198, dated 1457-11-21.

[[34\]](#_ftnref34) BNA, PRO, E 179/235/23, membrane 2, entry dated 1449-09-05. See Angelo Nicolini, “Mercanti e fattori genovesi in Inghilterra nel Quattrocento,” *Atti della società ligure di storia patria* 2ª serie, 45, no. 3 (2005), pp. 507–12, 532–4.

[[35\]](#_ftnref35) BNA, PRO, C 66/468, Patent Roll, 27 Hen VI, membrane 4d, entry dated 1449-03-10. See description in Alfred Bland, ed., *Calendar of the Patent Rolls Preserved in the Public Record Office. Henry VI, 1446–1452* (London: His Majesty’s Stationery Office, 1891), p. 238. Along with Giovanni, the partners were a mixture of elite and popular Genoese merchants resident in London—Teramo Cibo, Cipriano Spinola, Cristoforo Cattaneo, Giulio de Pilio, Giovanni Clavaro, Niccolò de Fornari, Lodovico Scotto, Giovanni Specia, and Andrea Lercari—illustrating the diverse Genoese merchant community in the English city.

[[36\]](#_ftnref36) ASGe, San Giorgio 111, Liber diversorum negotiorum spectabilis Officii dominorum Protectorum comperarum Sancti Georgii MCCCCLIII, fol. 3v, entry dated 1453-11-21.

[[37\]](#_ftnref37) ASGe, Compagnia della Caravana, mansocritti B, fol. 34r. See Giorgio Costamagna, ed., *Gli statuti della Compagnia dei Caravana del porto di Genova* (Torino: Accademia delle scienze, 1965), pp. 40–1; Gioffrè, *Mostra storica del documento assicurativo del XIV–XVI secolo*, pp. 48–9. The Compagnia della Caravana was the guild of Genoese longshoremen. The *Societas camalorum goaldorum* was the guild of dyers who worked with woad.

[[38\]](#_ftnref38) ASGe, San Giorgio 111, Liber diversorum negotiorum spectabilis Officii dominorum Protectorum comperarum Sancti Georgii MCCCCLIII, fol. 8r, entry dated 1453-08-08.

[[39\]](#_ftnref39) ASGe, San Giorgio 223, Filza di Caffa, nr. 3, item dated 1454-09-11, where “a fortuna quod quedam nostri burgensis Iohannis de Nigro pupis a copario Caffam navigabat...”; see Amadeo Vigna, ed. *Codice diplomatico delle colonie Tauro-Liguri durante la signoria dell'ufficio di S. Giorgio (1453–75). Tomo I* (Genova: Società ligure di storia patria, 1868), doc. 33, pp. 102–12.

[[40\]](#_ftnref40) ASGe, Archivio segreto 553, Diversorum cancellarie 58, anni 1453–1455, fols. 49v–72r. See Antonia Borlandi, “Ragioni politica e ragioni di famiglia nel dogato di Pietro Fregoso,” *La storia dei genovesi* 4 (1983), pp. 396–7.

[[41\]](#_ftnref41) ASGe, San Giorgio 115, Litterarum officiorum diversorum MCCCCLVII, fol. 2r, entry dated 1457-05-05, where “Quorum viginti IIII qui iuxta formam regule habent eligere officiales ad infrascripta officia, nomina sunt hec, videlicet... Iohannes de Nigro...”; see Vigna, ed. *Codice diplomatico delle colonie Tauro-Liguri. Tomo I*, doc. 144, pp. 728–32.

[[42\]](#_ftnref42) ASGe, Notai antichi 895, Tommaso Duracino, filza 8, nr. 606, dated 1465-11-05, where “Iohannes Baptista de Grimaldis civis Ianue quondam Luce... recognovit et recognoscit... Pauli de Franchis de Turri... emisse habuisse et recepisse tantam quantitatem suarum rerum et mercium bonarum et mercantilium... cum effectu libras ducentas Ianuinorum monete currentis hinc ad menses tres proxime venturos... si quedam sclava dicti Pauli nominata Caterina de progenie Zichorum ectatis annorum viginti octo vel circa gravida seu pregnans mensium octo vel circa de partu suo et de dicta eius gravidacione et pregnacione.. salva et viva evaserit quod tunc et eo casu presens instrumentum sit cassum irritum et nullum....”

[[43\]](#_ftnref43) ASGe, Notai antichi 898, Tommaso Duracino, filza 11, nr. 356, dated 1468-05-04, where “Baldasar Lomelinus civis Ianue quondam Stephani... recognovit et recognoscit... Argentine uxor quondam Tome Italiani... emisse habuisse et recepisse tantam quantitatem suarum rerum et mercium... cum effectu hinc ad menses quatuor proxime venturos libras ducentas Ianuinorum monete currentis... si quedam sclava... nominata Magdalena de progenie Iharchasorum ectatis annorum viginti quinque vel circa nunc gravida seu pregnans mensium septem vel circa de partu suo et de dicta eius gravidacione pregnatione et partu... salva et viva evaserit quod tunc et eo casu presens instrumentum sit cassum irritum et nullum...”

[[44\]](#_ftnref44) Barker, “The Risk of Birth: Life Insurance for Enslaved Pregnant Women” pp. 204–5, although she does not make note of the late century divergence.

[[45\]](#_ftnref45) Almost always specified with the generic phrase “tantam quantitatem suarum rerum et mercium bonarum et mercantilium causa infrascripta” or some variation thereof.

[[46\]](#_ftnref46) This notarial formula was developed in the fourteenth-century and did not occur in classical Roman law. An early example is provided by Melis, *Origini e sviluppi delle assicurazioni in Italia*, p. 366, from a contract in the Datini archives enacted in Genoa in 1393.

[[47\]](#_ftnref47) See Chapter 3 for details regarding the naming conventions of enslaved persons in notarial acts.

[[48\]](#_ftnref48) ASGe, Notai antichi 653, Branca Bagnara, filza 6, series II, nr. 130, dated 1441-05-09: “Pelegrus Succha filius Iohannis... recognovit... Catanei Grilli... habuisse et recepisse tantam quantitatem suarum rerum et mercium bonarum mercantilium... hinc ad menses septem proxime venturos, libras centum quinquaginta Ianuinorum... si quedam sclava dicti Catanei, vocata Margarita, etatis annorum decem et septem vel circa, nunc pregnans se gravida mensium IIIIor vel circa, de partu suo, et dicta eius pregnatione... salva et viva evaserit, tunc et eo casu, presens instrumentum sit cassum irritum et nullum...”

[[49\]](#_ftnref49) ASGe, Notai antichi 888, Tommaso Duracino, filza 1, series II, nr. 204, dated 1454-10-20, where “Damianus Iustinianus Longus quondam Thome... recognovit et recognoscit Gabrieli de Rapallo civi Ianue quondam Nicolai... habuisse et recepisse tantam quantitatem suarum rerum et mercium bonarum et mercantilium... cum effectu hinc ad menses decem cum dimidio proxime venturos... si quedam sclava dicti Gabrielis vocata Caterina ectatis annorum viginti octo in circa de progenie Tartarorum sive cuiusvis alterius progeniei existat nunc pregnans seu gravida mensium duorum cum dimidio in circa, de partu suo et de dicta eius pregnacione... salva et viva evaserit, tunc et eo causa presens instrumentum sit cassum irritum et nullum...”

[[50\]](#_ftnref50) ASGe, Notai antichi 888, Tommaso Duracino, filza 1, series I, nr. 16, dated 1453-01-31, where “Baxilius Axinela civis Ianue... recognovit et recognoscit... Iohannis de Valegia civis Ianue... habuisse et recepisse tantam quantitatem suarum rerum et mercium bonarum et mercantilium... cum effectu, hinc ad menses [blank space] proxime venturos libras centum quinquaginta Ianuinorum... si quedam sclava dicti Iohannis vocata Maria de progenie Rubeorum sive cuiusvis alterius progeniei existat ectatis annorum triginta quatuor vel circa nunc pregnans seu gravida mensium [blank space] vel circa de partu suo et dicta eius pregnatione... salva et viva evaserit, tunc et eo casu presens instrumentum sit cassum irritum et nullum...”

[[51\]](#_ftnref51) In their examination of the Florentine *catasto* of 1427, David Herlihy and Christiane Klapisch-Zuber note that citizens were generally unable to provide an accurate account of their own ages, resulting in a rounding-off of reported ages. The same problems with estimating age would certainly apply to enslaved persons as well. See David Herlihy and Christiane Klapisch-Zuber, *Tuscans and Their Families: A Study of the Florentine Catasto of 1427* (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1985), pp. 162–4.

[[52\]](#_ftnref52) ASGe, Notai antichi 719, Bartolomeo Risso, filza 5, series III, nrs. 97a, dated 1458-02-15, where “Iacobus de Grimaldis olim de Oliva asecuravit Augustinum Zucham per librarum duocentum Ianuinorum monete currentis super quadam sclava ipsius Augustini vocata Lucia ectatis annorum XVI in crica de progenie Tartarorum que dicitur esse gravida de ea gravidacione ac de occasione partuque eiusdem et occasione ipsius et cetera...” Agostino was from a *mercantes* family but became the spouse of Pometta Lomellini; see ASCGe, Manoscritti 52, Famiglie popolari genovesi, fol. 721r.

[[53\]](#_ftnref53) ASGe, Notai antichi 891, Tommaso Duracino, filza 4, nr. 274, dated 1459-05-29, for example: “de partu suo et de dicta eius gravidisione et pregnatione et occasione ipsorum partus gravidacionis et pregnationis salva et viva evaserit quod tunc et eo casu presens instrumentum sit cassum irritum et nullum...”

[[54\]](#_ftnref54) Igal Hendel and Alessandro Lizzeri, “The Role of Commitment in Dynamic Contracts: Evidence from Life Insurance,” *The Quarterly Journal of Economics* 118, no. 1 (2003), pp. 314–8.

[[55\]](#_ftnref55) John Christopoulos, *Abortion in Early Modern Italy* (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2021), p. 24; Wolfgang Müller, The Criminalization of Abortion in the West: Its Origins in Medieval Law (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 2012), pp. 181–6.

[[56\]](#_ftnref56) Herlihy and Klapisch-Zuber, *Tuscans and Their Families*, p. 145.

[[57\]](#_ftnref57) ASGe, Notai antichi 626, Pietro Bosco, filza 1, nr. 17, dated 1422-04-30: “Petrus delle Colonne sensale” agreed to pay “in faciendo se asecurare super dictam sclavam occassione eius partus.” See description in Gioffrè, *Il mercato degli schiavi a Genova nel secolo XV, p. 250.*

[[58\]](#_ftnref58) ASGe, Notai antichi 508, Branca Bagnara, register 3, 1426–1428, fols. 21r–22r, dated 1426-06-17: “Lodisius Antonius Cataneus civis Ianue, dominis et patronus nuncipie sive sclave vocate Lucia etatis annorum triginta quatuor vel circa de progenie ____ sciens et cognoscens ac noticiam certam habens, dicta Lucia eius sclavam fore presentaliter gravidam ex Iohanne Astherio et se nomine ipsius, et per dictus Iohannis ob dictam ingravidacione est ipsi Lodisio Antonio obligatus ad certas quantitates pecunarium soluverit tantam et dicte certaris ex presente factaris per ipsium Lodisii Antonii in faciendo se asecuratio super dictam sclavam estis ingravidacionis predicte, quod ex persone facte ut supra per ipsi Lodisii Antonii sunt libre tres Ianuinorum quantiatem etiam causa et occasione pene dicti partus dicte Lucie...”

[[59\]](#_ftnref59) Giovanni Piccamiglio, *Le livre de comptes de Giovanni Piccamiglio, homme d’affaires génois (1456–1459)*, ed. Jacques Heers (Aix-en-Provence: Éditions Ophrys, 1959), p. 185: “Item die 23 marcii in securitate de Lb.150 asec. super sclavam Pomeline sororis nostre a partu tantum in Domenico Toto revenditorio erbarum et de eo in capsia in LXVIII. [per lire] 3. [soldi] 4.” Unfortunately, Giovanni did not provide any additional details on the notary who enacted the insurance contract.

[[60\]](#_ftnref60) ASGe, San Giorgio 33108, Cabella securitatis MCCCCLXXXV, fol. 32r, entry dated 1485-10-07. See Gioffrè, *Il mercato degli schiavi a Genova nel secolo XV, p. 100;* Heers, *Esclaves et domestiques au Moyen Âge*, p. 219.

[[61\]](#_ftnref61) An estimated value of coverage based on the average price of an enslaved woman in sales contracts enacted in the year 1422. See Figure 21 on page 131 for details.

[[62\]](#_ftnref62) Jacques Heers, “Le prix de l’assurance maritime à la fin du Moyen-Age,” *Revue d’histoire économique et sociale* 37 (1959), pp. 15–7.

[[63\]](#_ftnref63) van Doosselaere, *Commercial Agreements and Social Dynamics in Medieval Genoa*, pp. 192–3.

[[64\]](#_ftnref64) George Androutsos et al., “From Miasmas to Germs: A Historical Approach to Theories of Infectious Disease Transmission,” *Le infezioni in medicina* 20, no. 1 (2012), pp. 58–62, provides a clear and concise overview.

[[65\]](#_ftnref65) Irvine Loudon, “The Transformation of Maternal Mortality,” *British Medical Journal* 305 (1992), pp. 1557–60. The advent of antibiotics in the twentieth century served to greatly accelerate this decline. The current maternal mortality rate in the European Union—in which women pass away while pregnant or within forty two days of termination of pregnancy—is approximately 0.008 percent (see note 61 below).

[[66\]](#_ftnref66) Claudia Hanson, *Data on Maternal Mortality. Historical Information Compiled for 14 Countries* (Stockholm: The Gapminder Foundation, 2010), pp. 15–7.

[[67\]](#_ftnref67) Wim van Lerberghe and Vincent de Brouwere, “Of blind alleys and things that have worked: history’s lessons on reducing maternal mortality,” in *Safe Motherhood Strategies: A Review of the Evidence* (Antwerp: ITG Press, 2000), p. 3.

[[68\]](#_ftnref68) Rachel Podd, “Reconsidering Maternal Mortality in Medieval England: Aristocratic Englishwomen, c. 1236–1503,” *Continuity and Change* 35, no. 2 (2020), pp. 115–7. The historical data collected by Bertrand-Yves Mafart for medieval Provence also falls in line with the natural maternal mortality posited above, see “Approche de la mortalité maternelle au Moyen âge en Provence,” *Dossiers de documentation archéologique* 17 (1994), pp. 207–19.

[[69\]](#_ftnref69) Herlihy and Klapisch-Zuber, *Tuscans and Their Families*, pp. 276–7.

[[70\]](#_ftnref70) See Melis, *Origini e sviluppi delle assicurazioni in Italia*, pp. 272–9. Antonio used a single notary—Branca Bagnara—for almost all his insurance contracts. These acts are collected in ASGe, Notai antichi 666, Branca Bagnara, filza 19, amongst other insurance acts. Only 1½ percent of Antonio’s insurance agreements were life insurance contracts for enslaved women.


[[71\]](#_ftnref71) Giovanni Cassandro, “Note storiche sul contratto di assicurazione,” *Assicurazioni: rivista di diritto, economia e finanza delle assicurazioni private* 26, no. 1 (1959), p. 16.

