# Part III. Networks of enslavement in the late medieval Genoese Mediterranean

In his dialogue titled *Notable Men and Women of our Time* (published 1527), the humanist Paolo Giovio addressed the character of the men and women of various regions of Italy. The interlocutors are the legal scholar Giovanni Antonio Muscettola, the condottiero Alfonso d’Avalos, and Paolo himself.[[1\]](#_ftn1) They discussed notable soldiers, literary figures, and famous women over a three-day period. The topic of famous women—a standard trope in humanist literature—occurred on the third day, with the women of Genoa receiving significant treatment in the dialogue. Paolo had spent some time in the city on a papal mission from the autumn of 1521 until the summer of 1522. While there, he obtained the patronage of Girolamo Adorno, an influential political figure known for his skilled diplomacy in the chaotic political world of early sixteenth century Genoa.[[2\]](#_ftn2) Paolo used his time in the city to cultivate extensive connections, particularly with political elites from the Adorno and Campofregoso families and merchant elites from the Spinola and Lomellini families.[[3\]](#_ftn3) Alongside the expected praise of well-connected Genoese noblewomen, the dialogue visits the social world of working class and enslaved women, imagining an evening scene where men and women of all classes mingled in a piazza, and where

> ... even the very slave women, bought from Scythians and Numidians, devote their holidays to sexual activities. They occupy themselves both in licentious games and in unrestrained dances near the fount of lovers and on the verdant shores of the Bisagno river.[[4\]](#_ftn4)

Paolo constructs a proto-Orientalist urban scene of enslaved Mediterranean women engaging in promiscuous dancing and morally suspect games with men and women across socioeconomic divides. This exotic and erotic portrayal is certainly a fictional construction that serves to denigrate the moral character of poor and enslaved women in the public sphere. Nevertheless, the quotidian presence of enslaved persons in Genoa—who had represented as much as ten percent of the population by the early fifteenth century[[5\]](#_ftn5)—was reflected in the social and economic structures of the city, as well as the urban fabric and lived experience of its citizens. A visitor to late medieval or early modern Genoa would likely have noticed the presence of women from the eastern Mediterranean in the streets and public squares. The demographic breadth of the network of persons who held enslaved women, furthermore, would have made it nearly impossible for the visitor to avoid interacting with them in some way or form. Genoese legislators thus tried their best to keep the enslaved out of sight: among the many laws that applied to them were nightly curfews and restrictions from working in the publicly owned brothels.[[6\]](#_ftn6)

This section consists of a series of six chapters that will continue the reconstruction of the socioeconomic networks of enslavement within the city of Genoa itself during the period of this study, that is, our ‘long fifteenth century’ between 1348 and 1528. The subjects of the narrative will turn from the slaveholders to the enslaved. The careful identification of enslaved persons in the notarial documentation will represent the first step in reconstructing the socioeconomic world of the enslaved of the late medieval Genoese Mediterranean. These notarial contracts were written from the perspective of the slaveholders and reflected their voices and attitudes towards enslavement. This part of the thesis represents an attempt towards the analysis of the actions, motivations, and perspectives of the enslaved. It is a preliminary attempt—an outline that will point the way towards further archival and secondary research to fully uncover the voices of the enslaved.

------

[[1\]](#_ftnref1) On Giovanni Antonio Muscettola (1487–1534), see Suzanne Thérault, *Un cénacle humaniste de la Renaissance autour de Vittoria Colonna, châtelaine d’Ischia* (Paris: Didier, 1968), pp. 363–4. On Alfonso d’Avalos (1502–46), see Antonio Gargano, “La doppia gloria di Alfonso d’Avalos e i poeti-soldatti spagnoli (Garcilaso, Cetina, Acuña),” in *La espada y la pluma: il mondo militare nella Lombardia spagnola cinquecentesca*, ed. Giuseppe Mazzocchi and Mario Rizzo (Viareggio: Baroni, 2000), pp. 347–60.

[[2\]](#_ftnref2) On Giovio’s sojourn in Genoa, see T. C. Price Zimmermann, *Paolo Giovio: The Historian and the Crisis of Sixteenth Century Italy* (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1995), pp. 46–8. On the diplomatic activity of Girolamo Adorno, see Giuseppe Oreste, *Genova e Andrea Doria nella fase critica del conflitto franco-asburgico* (Genova: Società ligure di storia patria, 1950), pp. 6–10.

[[3\]](#_ftnref3) Carlo Volpati, “Paolo Giovio a Genova,” *Giornale storico e letterario della Liguria* 2ª serie, 14 (1938), pp. 182–5.

[[4\]](#_ftnref4) Paolo Giovio, *Notable Men and Women of Our Time*, ed. and trans. Kenneth Gouwens (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2013), pp. 415–7. The term “Scythians” refers to enslaved women from the Crimean Peninsula and the term “Numidians” refers to enslaved women from north Africa.

[[5\]](#_ftnref5) Michel Balard, *La Romanie génoise: XIIe–début du XVe siècle* (Rome: École française de Rome, 1978), pp. 816–8. He estimates a population of 3000 to 5000 enslaved individuals in the early decades of the fifteenth century, from a total population of about 50000 persons.

[[6\]](#_ftnref6) Luigi Tommaso Belgrano, Cornelio Desimoni, and Vittorio Poggi, eds., *Leges genuenses* (Torino: Officium Regia, 1901), col. 960.
