# Chapter 9 The economy of the enslaved: demographic trends of enslavement in the Genoese Mediterranean

The chapters contained in Part II examined the structure of the economies and networks of slavery in the Genoese Mediterranean from the view of its voluntary participants: the slaveholders named in notarial contracts. This chapter will attempt to examine the economies of slavery in the Genoese Mediterranean from the view of its involuntary participants: the enslaved persons named in notarial contracts. The careful and contextual reading of these Genoese notarial contracts has identified over one thousand and nine hundred distinct enslaved persons who were active during the period of this study. The patterns of naming these enslaved individuals will provide the source for the qualitative and quantitative analyses of this chapter. An analysis of the relationship between the ratio of enslaved men to women and the social categories of slaveholders in sales, leasing, and manumission contracts will illuminate the social landscape of the enslaved in the spheres of the home and the workshop and clarify the relationship between slaveholders and the exploitation of enslaved men and women. An examination of the age of enslaved persons in sales, leasing, insurance, and manumission contracts will offer insights into key disruptions and opportunities in the life cycle of enslavement. The geographic distribution of the Genoese artisans named as slaveholders will offer new insights into population patterns of enslaved persons in the urban and rural spheres inside and outside the walled city of Genoa.

## 9.1 Enslaved men and women in the Genoese Mediterranean

The traditional story of Genoese Mediterranean slavery is the forced transport of enslaved women from the eastern Mediterranean and the Black Sea to labour as servants in the noble households of the Italian Peninsula.[[1\]](#_ftn1) The superficial examination of the sources tends to support both parts of this assertion. In his analysis of the *cabella sclavorum* tax registers of 1458, Domenico Gioffrè determined that ninety-seven percent of enslaved persons attested in Genoa—that is, being held in Genoa by slaveholders who were Genoese citizens—in that particular year were women.[[2\]](#_ftn2) The sales contracts of enslaved persons also reflect this trend, but at lower levels. In the contracts of Tommaso Duracino, eighty-four percent of the enslaved were women, and in the complete sample from 1348 to 1528, a similar proportion of eighty-five percent of the enslaved were women.[[3\]](#_ftn3) The analysis of tax registers have led many historians—especially those from outside Italy—to assume that the Genoese were hardly involved in the trade of enslaved men at all. The close and extensive examination of notarial contracts in this study illustrates that the trade in enslaved men, while still a minority of the overall trade, was larger than generally supposed. The focus on statistics from tax registers has also led to the assumption that enslaved persons in Genoa were primarily women who were household servants for noble families. This strictly numerical analysis, first of all, does not accurately reflect the multi-nodal and qualitative character of the Genoese Mediterranean commercial network, with its complex system of nodes of redistribution along the voyage from the Black Sea to Genoa. Genoese merchants actively engaged in the trade of enslaved persons in the eastern Mediterranean port cities of Pera, Famagusta, and Palermo, among others. These merchants actively bought and sold enslaved men from the eastern Europe and Asia in these locales, often using the proceeds of earlier sales of men for later purchases of additional enslaved women.[[4\]](#_ftn4) Jacques Heers has noted that enslaved men from Africa were not generally exploited by elite Genoese households, and for the most part, Genoese traders that held enslaved African men tended to sell them to merchants from Mallorca and the Iberian Peninsula, generally before they had returned to Genoa.[[5\]](#_ftn5) These slaveholders are amongst many who would not have been recorded in the cabella sclavorum tax registers. The identification and analysis, furthermore, of the social categories of the named slaveholders in notarial contracts in Chapter 4 belies the standard assumption that the market economy of slavery was solely the purview of elite merchants from *nobiles* families. Artisans and merchants from *populares* families represented a sizable proportion of Genoese slaveholders.

The market economy of slavery in Genoa was an economy predicated on the exchange of enslaved persons with the intention of their exploitation for various forms of labour. This included household labour as well as workshop and agricultural labour. The presumption that the Genoese Mediterranean slaving system was essentially the commerce of enslaved women conflates the local with the regional. An exclusive focus on the highly localized terminal nodes of the Mediterranean network of slavery overlooks the more numerous and complex nodes of redistribution that suggest a more diverse population—with regards to ratio of enslaved men to women and their regional provenance—of enslaved persons.

Enslaved persons in notarial contracts were identified with the prefixes *sclavam*, *servam*, *sclavum*, and *servum:* these were legally binding terms that served to impose and reinforce their marginalized social status.[[6\]](#_ftn6) Figure 42 illustrates the ratio of enslaved women to men in sales contracts with respect to the attestation of the slaveholder as a citizen of Genoa (or inhabitant of lands under Genoese dominion) or a citizen of some other Mediterranean polity.

[ image 701009A1.svg ]

Figure 42: Ratio of enslaved women to men in sales contracts with respect to local and foreign buyers. From the subset of 632 sales contracts recorded between 1348 and 1528.

The predominance of enslaved women in the market economy of slavery is clear. But it is far smaller than implied by the traditional narratives discussed earlier. The ratio of enslaved women to men held by local transactors—a ratio of 83 percent to 17 percent—corresponds to similar proportions seen in contracts enacted in the nearby cities of Pisa and Florence.[[7\]](#_ftn7) Enslaved men were also more than twice as likely to be purchased by slaveholders from locales outside of Genoa rather than slaveholders from the city itself, substantiating one part of the assertion by Heers regarding the supposed Genoese aversion to holding enslaved men. The data also illustrates that the Iberian Peninsula was the ultimate destination for many enslaved men embedded within the slaving networks of the Genoese Mediterranean, in which the city of Genoa represented a central node of redistribution in the larger network of Mediterranean slavery. Genoa was therefore one of the primary markets in which enslaved men were purchased in the late medieval Mediterranean.

Figure 43 illustrates the ratio of enslaved women to men in sales contracts where the slaveholders were identified as citizens of Genoa or as residents of villages outside the city that were under Genoese political authority. It illustrates the relation between the social category of slaveholders—that is, their legal classification as *nobiles*, *mercantes*, and *artefices*—and the ratio of enslaved men and women that they held in captivity.

[ image 701010A1.svg ]

Figure 43: Ratio of enslaved women to men in sales contracts with respect to the social category of the slaveholder. From the dataset of 632 sales contracts recorded from 1348 and 1528.

The result is somewhat surprising. It appears that there was little statistical difference in the ration of enslaved women to men amongst slaveholders from *nobiles*, *mercantes*, and *artefices* families. It might have seemed reasonable to assume *ante factum* that enslaved men were more likely to be purchased by individuals from *artefices* for two reasons. First of all, enslaved men were often considered more suitable to the work environment of an artisanal workshop, has generally entailed much heavier and more arduous labour than that of household service. Secondly, enslaved men were also much less costly to purchase than enslaved women,[[8\]](#_ftn8) thus making them a more attractive option for the less wealthy *artefices*. The situation was instead quite the opposite: enslaved women named in sales contracts were most likely to end up in the households and workshops of *artefices* families, and least likely to end up in the households of *nobiles* families.

The key to understanding this apparent paradox relies on the predominance of silk workers in the market economy of slavery. The assumption that enslaved men were more likely to be found as labourers in urban artisanal workshops might be a reasonable assumption when considering the multitude of workshops in their entirety, many of which required heavy and strenuous labour. The analysis of buyers and sellers in sales contracts for the enslaved in Chapter 12 has illustrated, however, that most of the transactors from *artefices* families were silk workers. Figure 61 on page 322 shows that silk workers constituted almost forty percent of buyers from *artefices* families in sales contracts. Sharon Strocchia and Paola Massa Piergiovanni argue that girls and young women were preferred by silk workers for the tasks of spinning and warping silk.[[9\]](#_ftn9) The use of women labourers by silk workers, coupled with their disproportionate participation in the market economy of slavery among the *artefices*, would thus create a disproportionate demand for enslaved women. The assumption that enslaved men were also more likely to end up in the households and workshops of *artefices* families due to their lower valuation in sales contracts might again be a reasonable assumption when considering the multitude of workshops in their entirety. But again, the predominance of silk workers from *artefices* families named as buyers in sales contracts weakens this assumption. Fernand Braudel has shown that silk workers were among the first occupational groups to adopt the *Verlagssystem*—or putting-out system—in which the silk merchant was transformed from an artisan with a workshop and a few labourers into an early form of managerial capitalist who oversaw an increasingly complex network of outsourced labourers, artisans, warehouses and workshops.[[10\]](#_ftn10) This transformation allowed silk merchants to rapidly accumulate significant amounts of financial capital, much more so than artisans from other industries, and as such the price differential between enslaved persons would have less financial impact upon them.

Figure 44 illustrates the ratio of enslaved men and women in leasing contracts enacted with respect to the social category of the principal transactors. The predominance of enslaved women in this aspect of the market economy of slavery is clear. There is an insignificant statistical difference in the slaveholding patterns of the *nobiles*, *mercantes*, and *artefices* with regards to holding enslaved men and women, even more so than the pattern seen in sales contracts shown in Figure 43. The only significant difference between the patterns of leasing and selling is that enslaved men were only half as likely to be exchanged in a lease as they were in a sale.

[ image 702008A1.svg ] 

Figure 44: Ratio of enslaved women to men in leasing contracts. From the dataset of 257 leasing contracts recorded between 1370 and 1500.

Families of enslaved persons sometimes entered a new household through leasing contracts, although this phenomenon was less common than it was for sales contracts. In the autumn of 1387, for example, an enslaved Albanian man named Giorgio and his son named Andrea entered the household of Domenico Riccio, a farmer from the Bisagno valley. The term of the lease was eight years for Giorgio and twelve years for Andrea and, furthermore, the contract specified that they were to serve as household servants as well as outdoor labourers, most likely working in the gardens of Domenico. The contract also stipulated that both Giorgio and Andrea were to be freed at the end of their terms.[[11\]](#_ftn11) This would have led to a rather odd situation for Giorgio, as Andrea would have had to remain enslaved for the next four years after the manumission of his father. Giorgio was an unskilled labourer and would have few options beyond joining the ranks of the working poor who toiled in the numerous workshops and industries in and around the city of Genoa. Perhaps he would have remained on with Domenico working as an agricultural wage labourer, an attractive option that would ensure that he kept close to his son. The future path of both men is nevertheless difficult to determine given the paucity of sources regarding their fate and the fate of the working poor in general.

## 9.2 The age of enslaved persons in the life cycle of enslavement

The age of the enslaved person was generally noted directly after their regional provenance and was seen as an important—though not necessary—part of contracts related to enslavement. The commonplace estimations of age in these contracts led Steven Epstein to sardonically remark that perhaps medieval “people were really very good at estimating ages.”[[12\]](#_ftn12) But unless the enslaved person knew their own age, was able communicate it to the principals of the contract, and was *willing* to communicate it to the principals—each step increasingly unlikely—it seems that the age of the enslaved individual was no more than an educated (or hopeful) guess.[[13\]](#_ftn13) This was pretty much stated in the sale enacted during the summer of 1447, in which an enslaved Circassian woman named Margarita was sold by the merchant from Piacenza named Lanzalotto de Lavezola to the dyer Opizino de Servaricia. In this contract Margarita was declared as “seventeen years of age or so, as it seems from her appearance.”[[14\]](#_ftn14) One could easily imagine that the estimated age of an enslaved man or woman was an important item of mediation between the buyer and seller—an economic quantity subject to negotiation much in the way that price was subject to negotiation—for which the enslaved person themselves had minimal input. The estimated age of enslaved persons agreed upon by the principal transactors in these contracts would not only influence the negotiated price, but it would provide a base reference that might affect the price obtained in any future exchange.

Most sales, leasing, insurance, and manumission contracts enacted for enslaved persons contained an estimate of their age, although this was not a legal requirement for identification. Enslaved persons named in sales contracts tended to be around twenty years of age. An enslaved man or woman of this age offered many advantages to the slaveholder. Both men and women of this age would be able to manage typical household and workshop chores, provided they remained healthy, for several decades. Enslaved women would also be able to serve as wet nurses if the matron of the household should have children.[[15\]](#_ftn15) Enslaved persons who had reached adulthood might have also been easier—and less expensive—to support and control than younger enslaved persons who were still children or in their teenage years.

Figure 46 illustrates the distribution of ages of enslaved persons named in sales contracts enacted in Genoa between the years 1348 and 1528. It illustrates a few prominent phenomena in the market economy of slavery, one of which was the regularity of commerce in enslaved children. The large numbers of enslaved children between the ages of twelve and seventeen entering into household and workshop labour was analogous to the parallel entry of impoverished boys and girls in the same age range into household and workshop labour in late medieval Italy.[[16\]](#_ftn16) The discrete distribution in Figure 46 is presented as a standard histogram with a bin size of four years: a value chosen to reflect the fact that the ages of the enslaved persons in these contracts were the negotiated estimates of slaveholders.[[17\]](#_ftn17) The central tendency measures indicate that twenty years was the most common age for enslaved persons named in sales contracts, with the median age being slightly higher at twenty-one years and the mean age at approximately twenty-one and a half years. The positive skewing of the distribution also suggests that enslaved persons were less likely to change households by means of sale once they had reached their adult years and furthermore, that the estimated ages of the enslaved were probably slightly lower than their actual ages. This also suggests that there might have been an innate tendency, or preference, for slaveholders to agree upon a lower estimated age for the enslaved individual. It also suggests that the seller may have had slightly more influence in negotiating the price of the contract over that of the buyer although this is difficult to determine empirically.

[ image 701011A3.svg ]

Figure 46: Age distribution of enslaved persons in sales contracts, 1348–1528. From the dataset of 632 sales contracts for enslaved persons recorded by Genoese notaries.

Figure 47 illustrates the distribution of ages of enslaved persons named in leasing contracts enacted in Genoa from 1370 to 1500. It illuminates some phenomena unique to this aspect of the market economy of slavery. The distribution is skewed to the left, which indicates that the enslaved tended to be named in leasing contracts at a later age: a tendency that might have been driven by the phenomenon of enslaved persons being leased multiple times during the life cycle of enslavement. It also suggests a hesitancy among slaveholder to the leasing out enslaved children: a hesitancy that might have been driven more by the price obtained by the lease, or the conservation of the economic value of the enslaved, than any moral concerns over their general wellbeing. The distribution is presented as a standard histogram with a bin size of four years: a value chosen again to reflect the fact that the ages of the enslaved persons in these contracts were the negotiated estimates of slaveholders. The central tendency measures illustrates that the rounded figure of twenty-five years was the most common age for enslaved persons named in leasing contracts, with a median age of twenty-eight years and a mean age of approximately twenty-eight years.

[ image 702010A1.svg ]

Figure 47: Age distribution of enslaved persons in leasing contracts, 1370–1500. From the dataset of 257 leasing contracts recorded by Genoese notaries.

A comparison of the skewing tendency of the histograms illustrating the age of enslaved persons named in sales and leasing contracts (in Figures 46 and 47, respectively) also illustrates the various socioeconomic forces at work in the Genoese networks of enslavement. The initial stages in the life cycle of many enslaved persons—the forced captivity, transport, and exchange of formerly free persons—distort the histogram for sales contracts towards the lower age range. The middle stages in the life cycle of many enslaved persons—the leasing or resale of enslaved persons—distorts the histogram for leasing contracts towards the higher age range. Enslaved people in their middle to late twenties were thus more likely to experience a change of household as the result of being leased rather than being sold.

Figure 48 illustrates the distribution of ages of enslaved women named in life insurance contracts enacted in Genoa between the years 1400 and 1510. This discrete distribution is presented as a standard histogram with a bin size of three years, again chosen to reflect the fact that the ages of the enslaved women in these contracts were the estimates of slaveholders.[[18\]](#_ftn18) The central tendency measures indicate that most enslaved women named in insurance contracts were twenty years of age, with the median age being quite higher at twenty-six years and the mean age at approximately twenty-six and a half years. Most enslaved women named in insurance contracts were between the ages of twenty and thirty, with a sharp drop off after the age of thirty.

[ image 703009A1.svg ]

Figure 48: Age distribution of enslaved women in life insurance contracts, 1400–1510. From the dataset of 222 contracts for enslaved women recorded by Genoese notaries.

The positive skewing of the distribution indicates a sudden spike in the pregnancy of enslaved women beginning with adulthood and, as with the distributions seen in sales contracts, it also suggests that the estimated ages of these enslaved women were probably slightly lower than their actual age. The innate tendency, or preference, for slaveholders to negotiate a lower estimated age at the time of sale persisted throughout moments in the life cycle of enslavement. This statistical trend was to the benefit of the slaveholder, who was able to retain this low-end estimation from the date of sale to obtain a higher price if they should decide to sell the enslaved woman in the future. The distribution also illustrates that some enslaved children were also becoming pregnant. In the winter of 1458, for example, the life of the pregnant Tatar child named Lucia, who was just sixteen years of age and held by the merchant Agostino Zucca, was insured by the underwriter Giacomo Grimaldi.[[19\]](#_ftn19) The pregnancy of enslaved children was rather uncommon, but it sometimes happened and this sexual abuse of enslaved minors represented another peril faced by young enslaved women in late medieval Genoa.

Figure 49 illustrates the age of manumission for enslaved persons named in leasing contracts with an obligation of manumission after the end of the term.

[ image 702013A1.svg ]

Figure 49: Age of manumission distribution for enslaved persons in leasing contracts with an obligation for manumission. From the set of 257 leasing contracts enacted from 1387 to 1500.

The average age of manumission for enslaved persons named in these contracts was approximately thirty-eight years, while the most frequent age of manumission was forty-two years. A superficial reading of this data would lead to the dubious conclusion that enslaved persons obtained their freedom in these contracts as a favour or reward for some earlier service. This might be the case for a small number of situations, but there was likely a colder economic calculus at work here. As enslaved men and women entered their fifth decade, their ability to continue the arduous labour of household and workshop service would be hampered by their decreasing physical capabilities, and at this point the cost of holding the enslaved persons might be greater than the value of the service that they were forced to provide. There is also the question of what happened to these formerly enslaved individuals once they entered society as free persons at these advanced ages. This question is considered in greater detail in Chapter 14.

In the autumn of 1479, an enslaved Bosnian woman named Caterina, on command of the heirs of the deceased merchant Ottaviano Imperiale, was leased out to serve the household of the merchant Battista Piccamiglio for a term of sixteen years. The contract stipulated that she be freed at the end of the term, at which point she would have been approximately forty-eight years of age.[[20\]](#_ftn20) It is unknown how long the enslaved Caterina had been serving in the household of the deceased Ottaviano, but the longer term of this lease would have weakened the kinship ties she might have developed within the Imperiale household. In any case the ties between Caterina and the heirs of Ottaviano were not particularly strong: it seems that they did not wish to assume the expense of holding Caterina and decided instead to lease her.

Figure 50 illustrates the age of manumission for enslaved persons named in manumission contracts. The average age of manumission was about thirty-four years, and the most frequent age of manumission was forty years. This is in close correspondence to the numbers for leasing contracts with the promise of manumission.

[ image 705003A1.svg ]

Figure 50: Age of manumission distribution for enslaved persons in manumission contracts. From the set of 308 manumission contracts enacted from 1387 to 1500.

The employment options for formerly enslaved people in their thirties and forties were few: the best they could hope for was low paying manual labour. Most guild statutes forbade the formerly enslaved from practicing any craft that they might have learned in their years of forced labour in workshops and household service. They were therefore likely assimilated into the working poor and probably continued to work in artisanal workshops and elite households as low-paid wage labourers. It might be said that while their legal status of enslaved had disappeared, they nevertheless continued to work in conditions of enslavement.

Table 11 tabulates the data collected from the previous five figures. It isolates the moments in the life cycle of slavery where the enslaved were exchanged between households and moments when slaveholders accumulated financial and social capital from these exchanges.

Table 11: The age of enslaved persons in contracts across the life cycle of slavery

| Contract type           | Declared age (central tendency measures) |        |      |
| ----------------------- | ---------------------------------------- | ------ | ---- |
|                         | mean                                     | median | mode |
| sale                    | 21.49                                    | 21     | 20   |
| insurance               | 26.45                                    | 26     | 20   |
| leases                  | 28.28                                    | 28     | 25   |
| manumission             | 34.34                                    | 32     | 40   |
| manumission after lease | 37.59                                    | 38     | 42   |

## 9.3 The geospatial distribution of the enslaved in the republic of Genoa

The enslaved persons held by slaveholders from *nobiles* and larger *mercantes* families would have lived within the city of Genoa where they served as household servants. The analysis of Chapter 9 also illustrated that a substantial proportion of slaveholders were from *artefices* families. The enslaved persons held by these artisans would have laboured in workshops located within the city and the towns of the surrounding region. In most cases these enslaved persons were also expected to provide household service.[[21\]](#_ftn21) The settlement patters of enslaved persons can be determined by the close and comprehensive analysis of the naming patterns of over nine hundred slaveholders from *artefices* families named in contracts related to the market economy of slavery. This analysis reveals that approximately forty percent of these persons were named as residents of small and medium sized communes outside of the Genoese city walls—from places like Vernazza, Lavagna, Savona, Recco, Bordighera, Albenga, and many others located in the Ligurian countryside—and which were also under the dominion of the republic. Figures 51 through 54 illustrate the settlement patterns of enslaved persons based on the attested place of residency for men and women from *artefices* families who were named as slaveholders.

[ image 701015A1.svg ]

Figure 51: Distribution of towns and villages in the Republic of Genoa where enslaved persons served in the houses and workshops of artisans named in sales contracts, 1348–1528. The markers indicate places named in the subset of 632 contracts and their radii are proportional to magnitude of activity.

[ image 702014A1.svg ]

Figure 52: Distribution of towns and villages in the Republic of Genoa where enslaved persons served in the houses and workshops of artisans named in leasing contracts, 1348–1528. The markers indicate places named in the subset of 257 contracts and their radii are proportional to magnitude of activity.

[ image 703003A2.svg ]

Figure 53: Distribution of towns and villages in the Republic of Genoa where enslaved persons served in the houses and workshops of artisans named in insurance contracts, 1348–1528. The markers indicate places named in 222 contracts and their radii are proportional to magnitude of activity.

[ image 705002A1.svg ]

Figure 54: Distribution of towns and villages in the Republic of Genoa where enslaved persons served in the houses and workshops of artisans named in manumission contracts, 1348–1528. The markers indicate places named in 308 contracts and their radii are proportional to magnitude of activity.

The wide geographical settlement of enslaved persons across the communes and villages of the Ligurian countryside is clearly indicated. It shows that the enslaved could be found labouring in small port towns as well as in valleys and mountains north of the Ligurian coast. Domenico Gioffrè has suggested that slavery was uncommon in the Ligurian countryside and perhaps it was, if you only consider, as he did, the enslaved persons who were specifically exploited for agricultural labour.[[22\]](#_ftn22) A closer analysis of the slaveholders named in these contracts, however, demonstrated that enslaved persons were a continuous presence in villages across the entire region as forced labourers in artisanal workshops. Slavery was clearly not just an urban phenomenon

**

The social and spatial demography of enslavement in late medieval Genoa was elucidated in this chapter through a quantitative analysis of the ratio of enslaved men to women and the attested age of enslaved persons exchanged in the market economy of slavery. The relationship between the ratio of enslaved men to women, their appearance in various contracts, and the social categories of the men and women who held them illustrated that enslaved women were the primary objects in the market economy of slavery in late medieval Genoa. It also demonstrated that there was a smaller yet significant market for enslaved men, particularly for merchants who came to Genoa from Iberia and the surrounding regions. The geospatial analysis applied to the slaveholders named in sales, leasing, insurance, and manumission contracts—particularly those from *artefices* families—illustrated many slaveholders from smaller artisan families in the port towns and mountain communes across the Republic of Genoa. This illustrates that Genoese slavery was not only an urban phenomenon: enslaved persons could be found living and working across the entirety of the region of modern-day Liguria.

------

[[1\]](#_ftnref1) See again Robin Blackburn, *The Making of New World Slavery: From the Baroque to the Modern, 1492–1800* (London: Verso, 1998), p. 55, for this traditional narrative.

[[2\]](#_ftnref2) ASGe, San Giorgio 33744, Cabella sclavorum 1460, fols. 2r–161v; see the analysis of this register in Domenico Gioffrè, *Il mercato degli schiavi a Genova nel secolo XV* (Genova: Fratelli Bozzi, 1971)*,* pp. 79–80.

[[3\]](#_ftnref3) There were 300 enslaved women named in the contracts of Tommaso Duracino out of a total of 356 enslaved persons. There were 1532 enslaved women in the overall set of contracts out of a total of 1806 enslaved persons where the enslaved person could be clearly identified as a man or a woman. The close correlation between the proportions of the Duracino contracts and the proportion in the entirety suggests that the Duracino subset is a fairly representative sample for this measure.

[[4\]](#_ftnref4) Catherine Otten-Froux, “Un notaire vénitien à Famagouste au XIVe siècle. Les actes de Simeone, prêtre de San Giacomo dell’Orio (1362–1371),” *Thesaurismata* 33 (2003), docs. 23, 112, 113, and 159.

[[5\]](#_ftnref5) Jacques Heers, “Les catalans à Gênes vers 1450. Étude sociale,” in *Atti del IIIª convegno internazionale di studi colombiani* (Genova: Civico istituto colombiano, 1979), pp. 34–5.

[[6\]](#_ftnref6) See the discussion and analysis of these terms in Chapter 3.

[[7\]](#_ftnref7) Franco Angiolini, “Padroni e schiavi a Pisa nel XV secolo,” in *De l’esclavitud a la llibertat: esclaus i llibertats a l’Edat Mitjana*, ed. Maria Teresa Ferrer i Mallol and Josefina Mutgé i Vivés (Barcelona: Departament d’Estudis Medievals, 2000), p. 719, where an examination of the 1428–1429 *catasto* of Pisa where only three of fifty-six of enslaved persons were identified as men.

[[8\]](#_ftnref8) See the economic analysis of prices of enslaved persons in Chapter 5 for additional details.

[[9\]](#_ftnref9) Sharon Strocchia, *Nuns and Nunneries in Renaissance Florence* (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2010), pp. 118–9; Paola Massa Piergiovanni, “Technological Typologies and Economic Organisation of Silk Workers in Italy, from the XIVth to the XVIIIth Centuries,” *Journal of European Economic History* 22 (1993), p. 552.

[[10\]](#_ftnref10) Fernand Braudel, *Civilization and Capitalism, 15th–18th Century. Volume II: The Wheels of Commerce* (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1982), pp. 316–20.

[[11\]](#_ftnref11) ASGe, Archivio segreto 1527A, Abazia di San Siro 1316–1653, entry dated 1387-10-02, where “Iohannina filia quondam Antonii de Vigono et uxor quondam Valentis de Valente locavit et titulo locationis dedit et cessit Domenighino Ricio ortolano in Bisamne...duos famulos ipsius Iohannine de progenie Arbanorum sive servos vocatos unum scilicet Georgius aetatis annorum XXVIII et alterum Andreas aetatis annorum octo et qui Andreas est filius dicti Georgii et operas dictorum famulorum sive servorum... ad serviendum et famulandum eidem Domenighno et ei et familie sue omnia servicia facienda in domo et extra...”; see edition in Tria, *La schiavitù in Liguria*, doc. 22, pp. 152–3.

[[12\]](#_ftnref12) Epstein, *Speaking of Slavery*, p. 104.

[[13\]](#_ftnref13) This is seen by the suffix “vel circa”, or some variation thereof, appended to every declaration of age. The enslaved person was generally not present, furthermore, when the contracts were drawn up.

[[14\]](#_ftnref14) ASGe, Notai antichi 844, Costantino de Albertis, filza 1, series I, nr. 159, dated 1447-09-04, where “Lanzalotus de Lavezola de Placentia quodam Bartholmei... vendidit cessit traddidit ac consignavit Opecino de Servaricia unctori quondam Christophori… quandam sclavam dicti Lanzaloti vocatam Margaritam de progenie Iarcasorium etatis annorum decem septem in circa ut ex aspectu ipsius apparet...”

[[15\]](#_ftnref15) See the discussion on page 305 for the use of enslaved women as wet nurses in late medieval Genoa.

[[16\]](#_ftnref16) Christiane Klapisch-Zuber, “Women Servants in Florence during the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Centuries,” in *Women and Work in Preindustrial Europe*, ed. Barbara Hanawalt (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1986), pp. 59–70; Bruno Casini, *Il catasto di Pisa del 1428–29* (Pisa: Editrice Giardini, 1964), pp. 65–70.

[[17\]](#_ftnref17) In their examination of the Florentine *catasto* of 1427, David Herlihy and Christiane Klapisch-Zuber note that citizens were generally unable to provide an accurate account of their own ages, resulting in a rounding-off of reported ages. The same problems with estimating age would certainly apply to enslaved persons as well. See David Herlihy and Christiane Klapisch-Zuber, *Tuscans and Their Families: A Study of the Florentine Catasto of 1427* (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1985), pp. 162–4.

[[18\]](#_ftnref18) In their examination of the Florentine *catasto* of 1427, David Herlihy and Christiane Klapisch-Zuber note that citizens were generally unable to provide an accurate account of their own ages, resulting in a rounding-off of reported ages. The same problems with estimating age would certainly apply to enslaved persons as well. See David Herlihy and Christiane Klapisch-Zuber, *Tuscans and Their Families: A Study of the Florentine Catasto of 1427* (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1985), pp. 162–4.

[[19\]](#_ftnref19) ASGe, Notai antichi 719, Bartolomeo Risso, filza 5, series III, nrs. 97a, dated 1458-02-15, where “Iacobus de Grimaldis olim de Oliva asecuravit Augustinum Zucham per librarum duocentum Ianuinorum monete currentis super quadam sclava ipsius Augustini vocata Lucia ectatis annorum XVI in crica de progenie Tartarorum que dicitur esse gravida de ea gravidacione ac de occasione partuque eiusdem et occasione ipsius et cetera...”

[[20\]](#_ftnref20) ASGe, Notai antichi 909, Tommaso Duracino, filza 22, nr. 681 (formerly nr. 482), dated 1479-12-18, where “Iohannes de Grimaldis olim de Oliva civis Ianue quondam Manuelis et Melchion Imperialis maior annis triginta… etiam civis Ianue … et Gregorius de Grimaldis olim de Oliva fratris dicti Iohannis nomine et vice filiorum et heredes quondam Octaviani Imperialis... vendiderunt et titulo vendicionis dederunt tradiderunt et consignaverunt Baptiste Pichamilio civi Ianue Iohannis... quandam sclavam dictorum heredum dicti quondam Octaviani nominatam Caterina de progenie Bossinorum ectatis annorum triginta duorum vel circa... ad annos sexdecim proxime venturos...”

[[21\]](#_ftnref21) See the discussion and analysis of this phenomenon in Chapter 12.

[[22\]](#_ftnref22) Gioffrè, *Il mercato degli schiavi*, p. 115.