# Chapter 10 The social topography of the enslaved: the social character of enslavement in the Genoese Mediterranean

The study and analysis of notarial contracts—contracts that also recorded the exchange of and capital accumulation from enslaved persons—in the late medieval and early modern Genoese Mediterranean has largely been the domain of legal and economic historians. These contracts have provided insights into legal practice and represent a valuable source of socioeconomic information about the Mediterranean commercial world. The formulaic and rigid quality of these sources and their persistent historical silences gives the impression that there is not much more to be obtained from them. The historical examinations of the social world of enslaved persons in the Genoese Mediterranean have thus focused on other sources, such as court cases, governmental decrees, statutory law, art history, and literary history. These are all valuable sources and indeed historians have only scratched the surface of employing them to understand the history of slavery. This thesis maintains that the close, careful, and contextual reading of the supposedly sterile notarial documentation—always keeping in mind that they were written from the perspective of the slaveholders—can provide valuable supplementary insights into the daily lives of enslaved persons in the Genoese Mediterranean. These insights do not represent the entire story of Mediterranean slavery: on the contrary, they offer only brief glimpses into the social world of the enslaved. But given the paucity of sources relating to fourteenth and fifteenth century Mediterranean slavery, these glimpses are important and should not be overlooked. This chapter will consider what the often sterile and formulaic sales, leasing, insurance, and manumission contracts can reveal about the social topography of enslaved men and women in Genoa and the Genoese Mediterranean. The close reading of contracts will identify the inclusions, omissions, and conditions that offer insights into the health issues of enslaved persons, their outward appearance in the public sphere, and the forms of exploitation that were features of their daily existence.

## 10.1 The health of enslaved persons

There have been numerous studies on the health of enslaved men and women in antebellum America. The seminal study of Virginia King and Kenneth Kiple on the health issues faced by the enslaved in the seventeenth and eighteenth-century Americas illustrated how unsanitary living arrangements, brutal and extreme forced labour, and insufficient nutrition all contributed to the disproportional rates of infirmity, disease, and death of the enslaved relative to their holders.[[1\]](#_ftn1) Subsequent studies on slavery and health have supported their thesis regarding the correlation between the living conditions of the enslaved and the infirmities that plagued the southern plantations.[[2\]](#_ftn2) The relationship between health and living conditions has yet to be considered at any length by scholars of late medieval and early modern Mediterranean slavery. This section offers some preliminary soundings towards this future study of health and Mediterranean slavery: it is by no means comprehensive but suggests that the health conditions indicated in notarial contracts might offer an entry point to some future study.

The declaration regarding the health of an enslaved individual was an important part of sales and leasing contracts. Most sales contracts for enslaved persons simply declared that they were in good health, but as studies above have shown, the health of the enslaved was evaluated quite differently than the health of the slaveholder, as certain conditions were racialized and deemed inherent to enslaved Africans in the antebellum south. This thesis contends that an analogous logic may have been applied in the late medieval and early modern Mediterranean. The declaration of ‘good health’ of an enslaved person should thus be read as ‘minimally satisfactory’ health and not equivalent to a similar declaration applied to any free person. In the spring of 1457, for example, an enslaved Russian woman named Margarita held by Alberto di Negro was sold to the Venetian merchant Giovanni de Amatis. After the declaration of her regional provenance and estimated age, the contract declared that she was

> healthy and in good condition, free from all infirmity and ailments, [both] hidden and apparent, according to the customary law of the state of Genoa[[3\]](#_ftn3)

This statement—or some variation of this statement—appeared in most Genoese notarial contracts where an enslaved man or woman was declared as healthy. But what did this really mean? The assertion of health was made by the slaveholder and not the enslaved, and as such, it was reflective of the view of the slaveholder and must be considered with scepticism. Additional archival research needs to be conducted to satisfactorily answer this question—and the sources may not be numerous nor detailed enough—but some initial insights might be obtained by considering the slight variations made to this statement in notarial contracts.

If an enslaved man or woman exchanged in a notarial contract was deemed to be suffering from some unknown medical condition–or was not sufficiently vigorous to be declared as healthy–the contract would usually state that the enslaved person was being exchanged *talem qualem est*. This statement asserted that the slaveholder selling or leasing the enslaved made no guarantee related to their health. In some cases, the contract stated that the enslaved individual was ‘healthy or not’—or some other variation of this statement—with no additional information regarding any specific medical condition. In the summer of 1457, for example, an enslaved Tatar woman named Lucia was enumerated as an object of inventory in the testament of the deceased Teramo Arbicone. The curator of the possessions of the deceased Teramo was his son Luca, who, along with his brothers, had decided to sell the enslaved Caterina to the cooper Niccolò Tassorello. Any familial bonds of kinship between the heirs and the enslaved Lucia were insufficient to prevent her sale, in which her health described as *talem qualem est*, that is, with no guarantees made by the heirs regarding the health and wellbeing of the enslaved Caterina.[[4\]](#_ftn4) In another example from the summer of 1447, an enslaved Tatar woman named Lucia was leased by the merchant Luca de Fornari to the merchant Giovanni Giustiniani for a term of ten years. The contract recording this lease omitted the standard declaration of health and noted that the enslaved Lucia had also been declared *talem qualem est*.[[5\]](#_ftn5) In both cases the notary did not provide any additional information regarding the specific health issues of the enslaved person, but the health of the enslaved must have been in rather poor condition to ensure this statement in the contract.

In most contracts the enslaved person was declared in good health (with the caveats indicated earlier) and with the additional qualification that the receiver would assume any subsequent “risk, danger, or bad fortune.” This ensured that if the health of the enslaved person declined after the contractual exchange, then any liability would not be on the seller or leaser unless the person receiving the enslaved person was able to prove that they were unhealthy at the time of exchange. This risk was generally assumed by the receiver at the moment of enactment but sometimes it remained with the initial slaveholder for a period. In the autumn of 1464, for example, an enslaved Circassian woman named Lucia held by Giorgio de Clavaro was sold to the Valencian merchant Sanchis de Sorqûebos. The contractors agreed that enslaved Lucia was in good health at the time of the transaction. The contract also stated that the risk that her health might take a turn for the worse after the transaction would remain with the seller Giorgio until the moment when she boarded the vessel of Sanchez docked at the port of Genoa. After this point, the risk would then be assumed by the buyer Sanchis.[[6\]](#_ftn6) This was one of three purchases made by the Valencian merchant between the years 1461 and 1464. He was probably familiar with mechanics of the market economy of slavery, and it seems that he may have purchased an enslaved man or woman at some earlier time who had become ill or infirm immediately after the exchange. Sanchis might have wanted to avoid such risk in future transactions, therefore, by including this delayed assumption of risk.

An enslaved man or woman might also be declared in good overall health but with additional notes about specific physical and mental conditions recorded within one or more additional sub-clauses.[[7\]](#_ftn7) These so-called exception clauses were the standard method for denoting the health issues faced by enslaved persons in many cities of late medieval Genoese Mediterranean. Christoph Cluse has found similar descriptions in the sales contracts of enslaved persons enacted in fourteenth-century Pisa.[[8\]](#_ftn8) The most common use of the exception clause was to declare the pregnancy of an enslaved woman (this will be discussed in the next section) but it was also used to refer to other physical ailments common amongst enslaved persons.

The exception clause was often used to declare physical ailments unrelated to pregnancy, especially those that might impede any form of physical labour. It is important to remember that there were legal disincentives for the slaveholder to conceal significant issues related to the health of the enslaved in a sales or leasing contract. If any physical or physiological shortcomings were not declared at the time of sale, the Genoese statutory law allowed for the buyer to rescind the sales contract and request the return of their payment. If the seller or leaser of an enslaved person refused to return the payment, the receiver could petition the sale before the *Officium sindicatorum*—the official judicial body of the state that heard and ruled upon legal disputes. If they were successful with this petition, then the original slaveholder was obligated to receive the enslaved person back into their possession and return double the original paid amount to the buyer.[[9\]](#_ftn9) It is likely that some merchants attempted to conceal health issues of the enslaved. Hannah Barker describes how commercial brokers in the slave markets of fourteenth-century Cairo commonly attempted to conceal the health issues of enslaved persons in their possession.[[10\]](#_ftn10) Debra Blumenthal likewise describes how some brokers in fifteenth-century Valencia attempted to pass off as healthy enslaved persons who were disabled.[[11\]](#_ftn11) It was likely that some Genoese merchants engaged in similar forms of deception, but future archival research is required on this topic.

The recent work of Jenifer Barclay has shown that almost ten percent of enslaved persons in antebellum America suffered from some form of physical disability.[[12\]](#_ftn12) There has been no similar study made for enslaved persons in the Mediterranean, but it seems likely that a similar proportion also suffered from physical disabilities. An interesting Genoese case concerns a series of three sales related to an enslaved Tatar woman named Maria, who was declared as suffering from a limp, a physical ailment that might have impaired her exploitation as a household or workshop labourer. In the autumn of 1458, Maria was sold by the merchant Angelo Marchesio to the apothecary Angelo de Maiolo for 120 Genoese lire.[[13\]](#_ftn13) The price of this exchange represented a significant reduction from the average price of 200 Genoese lire for enslaved women from the Crimean Peninsula in the mid-fifteenth century—a reduction that was most likely the result of her disability.[[14\]](#_ftn14) About three weeks later an enslaved Tatar woman named Maria was sold by the same Angelo to the belt-maker Gabriele Risotto for 100 Genoese lire. This Maria was also described as having a limp and was the same age as the Maria of the sale that occurred a few weeks earlier, although she was sold for 20 lire less.[[15\]](#_ftn15) There are two possibilities here. The first possibility is that Maria was the same person in the earlier contract whom Angelo had sold a second time, with the first sale having been rescinded for some unknown reason. The second possibility is that there were two enslaved women named Maria, both with the same regional provenance and age, and both being affected by a limp. The former case seems by far the more likely scenario, and the life of an enslaved woman named Maria, who had been declared as pregnant, had been insured by Angelo Marchesio just two years earlier.[[16\]](#_ftn16) Both possibilities nevertheless illustrate enslaved persons with physical disabilities and demonstrate the difficultly of exchanging them in commercial contracts. They also raise the issue of how Maria might have become disabled: was it abuse, neglect, or some other cause? It is difficult to determine. But the story does not end here. Four months later, in the spring of 1469, Gabriele Risotto agreed to rescind the second contract and return Maria to the merchant Giacomo Marchesio, the uncle of the original seller Angelo. This third contract stated that the younger Angelo did not have the legal right, according to the civil statutes, to sell Maria. The notary noted that Giacomo, acting “justly and honestly”, agreed to return the 100 Genoese lire to Gabriele, and Gabriele agreed to rescind the earlier sale and return Maria to him.[[17\]](#_ftn17) Although the exact nature of the transgression “against all law” by Angelo was not described, it was most likely the case that he had sold Maria against the wishes of his uncle, who appeared to hold the legal rights over her. The third action supports the second possibility indicated earlier—that the Maria of the first two sales contracts was the same person—and that Angelo may have been involved in some questionable activity by attempting to sell her on multiple occasions. It may have been the case that Angelo viewed her disability as a liability and that this view may not have been shared by his uncle Giacomo.

There were other common physical ailments experienced by the enslaved of late medieval Genoa that were sometimes declared in the exception clause. In the autumn of 1477 an enslaved north African woman named Caterina, who suffered from tinea capitis, a common fungal infection of the scalp, was purchased by silk worker Giovanni Mangiavacca.[[18\]](#_ftn18) This affliction seemed to be an occasional medical issue for enslaved persons in late medieval Genoa. In another example from the winter of 1463, an enslaved man named Giacomo, who had been captured from the Canary Islands and held by Battista Doria, was sold to the Mallorcan merchant Juan Focoberto. In this early example of the sale of an indigenous Guanche from the Canaries in the republic of Genoa, Giacomo was described as generally healthy but also suffering from tinea capitis.[[19\]](#_ftn19) Kiple and King, in their study of antebellum American slavery, noted how the set of diseases common among the enslaved had become racialized and subsequently classified as “negro diseases” despite their affliction across the entirety of the population.[[20\]](#_ftn20) It could be the case that tinea capitis was subsequently construed as a disease of enslaved persons by late medieval Mediterranean slaveholders, especially since modern medical studies note that it was an affliction based largely upon environmental and sanitary conditions.[[21\]](#_ftn21) The prevalence of tinea capitis and similar afflictions amongst the enslaved persons in the late medieval Mediterranean requires further archival study. In a final example from the winter of 1454, an enslaved Russian woman named Caterina was leased out by the merchant Donato Bondenario another merchant Marco de Pelegro for a term of eight years. The contract stated that Caterina was healthy according to the customs of Genoa except for a cyst in one of her eyes.[[22\]](#_ftn22) The contract did not specify whether the cyst represented a health concern—that is, the possibility of sight impairment—or merely a superficial concern regarding appearance, although both concerns were probably factors in the declaration. The declaration also hints at the possibility of malnutrition as cysts in the region of the eye have been shown as indicative of a lack of Vitamin A.[[23\]](#_ftn23)

Sales and leasing contracts related to the exchange of enslaved persons specified additional obligations assumed by the receiver in order to ensure that they would be kept in good health. Many leasing contracts also contained an additional obligation to ensure that enslaved persons would be kept safe and healthy during the duration of the lease and, furthermore, was safe and healthy *at the moment* when were they returned to their original holder. In the summer of 1468, for example, an enslaved Circassian woman named Maria, held by Selvagia Doria, who was the widow of Pietro Gentile, was leased out to the merchant Rainaldo Gentile for a term of twelve years. Selvagia had recently been remarried to a certain Ottone Piolo, a member of the landed nobility from the commune of Savigliano in the region of Savoy.[[24\]](#_ftn24) It was probably the case that Maria had been serving as a household servant in the Gentile household and that Maria did not wish to bring her to Savigliano. Selvagia also received an amount of 120 Genoese lire for the rather long lease—a significant sum that was not far off the average sale price for an enslaved woman at that time.[[25\]](#_ftn25) The contract obligated Rainaldo, furthermore, to return Maria in good health and mind and without any injury or illness at the end of the lease.[[26\]](#_ftn26) It must be again kept in mind that the concept of ‘good health’ of an enslaved person was not equivalent to the concept of the ‘good health’ of the slaveholder. 

These conditions and obligations were not driven, furthermore, by moral concerns regarding the physical and mental wellbeing of enslaved persons. They instead reflected the legally sanctioned concept of the enslaved person as property, for which health was only important with regards to financial value. The reasoning behind these conditions was purely instrumental, and as such, any expressed concerns about physical or mental wellbeing were purely economic concerns.

## 10.2 Enslavement and pregnancy

Pregnant women were considered healthy persons under Roman law. In the late medieval Mediterranean, pregnancy in and of itself was not considered to be an unhealthy physical condition that necessitated medical treatment.[[27\]](#_ftn27) The pregnancy of an enslaved woman was therefore not mentioned in the clauses describing health in sales and leasing contracts. But the ultimate success of the pregnancy—particularly the concern of fear of death through childbirth—was sometimes part of the contract. In these contracts the woman was declared as pregnant along with a supplementary statement that the risk of her death was explicitly agreed to the slaveholder who had purchased or received her.

The enslaved women of late medieval Genoa were certainly aware that slaveholders valued their ability to become pregnant and produce children. The pregnancy of enslaved women would not only increase the population of the enslaved—and the corresponding financial capital of slaveholders—but it would also allow the slaveholder to reap additional financial benefits by leasing these women as wet nurses. The declaration of pregnancy of an enslaved woman served as an indication that she would be able to serve as a nurse soon after the transaction, and moreover, a successful pregnancy also ensured that an enslaved woman would likely have less difficulty becoming pregnant again in the future. This was a significant benefit to the slaveholder that outweighed the possible risks of pregnancy. The seller of an enslaved woman could thus expect to receive a financial premium for the same reason: that she could serve as a wet-nurse after giving birth. Domenico Gioffrè has estimated that pregnant enslaved women denoted as *cum lacte* (that is, ready to breast feed) commanded a premium of twenty-five to thirty percent in the sales contracts over the price that would have been paid for a woman who was not pregnant and able to nurse.[[28\]](#_ftn28) There were, nevertheless, some risks for both the enslaved woman and the buyer. Foremost was the possibility of death resulting from childbirth—a common concern in the pre-modern era—for which the Genoese had created a unique form of insurance contract to protect the slaveholder.[[29\]](#_ftn29) Since the status of enslavement in Genoa—as with many parts of the Mediterranean world—was legally determined by matrilineage, the child of a pregnant enslaved woman would furthermore be born enslaved.[[30\]](#_ftn30) The costs of providing housing, clothing, and sustenance for an enslaved child until the age upon which they were ready to serve in the household—or forcibly taken from their mother and sold to another family—might serve as a disincentive for some buyers to purchase an impregnated woman. The legal enslavement of the sons and daughters of enslaved women was certainly a primary incentive for the abandonment of children in the Mediterranean. In Florence, for example, twenty-two percent of children abandoned at the Ospedale di San Gallo between 1430 and 1439 were the offspring of enslaved women.[[31\]](#_ftn31) The abandonment of her child to an orphanage has often been interpreted as the desire of the slaveholder, but it might have also represented the desire of the enslaved mother, since this difficult decision might provide her child the chance to escape the yoke of domestic servitude in favour of life within a religious order or legitimation by a subsequent adopting family.[[32\]](#_ftn32)

The risk of death from pregnancy was a constant concern among women in the late medieval Mediterranean world. The poor diets and living conditions of enslaved women served to amplify this concern. In the mind of the slaveholder, however, the risk of death from pregnancy was a personal financial risk. The stipulations in sales and leasing contracts ensured that should an enslaved woman declared as pregnant pass away after the exchange as a direct result of that pregnancy—in a proscribed time before, during, or after giving birth—then the receiving slaveholder would not be liable for any recompense from the original slaveholder. In the winter of 1392, for example, an enslaved Tatar woman named Margarita was sold by the notary Antonio de Castilione to a woman from an *artefices* family also named Margarita, who was the spouse of an apothecary from San Remo named Odone Galaffio. The contract stated that the enslaved Margarita had been in normal health up to the day of the contract, that she was currently pregnant, and that the purchaser agreed to accept any and all risk and peril that might arise on account of her pregnancy.[[33\]](#_ftn33) In a similar vein, a contract from the autumn of 1415, an enslaved Tatar woman named Maddalena was indicated as pregnant at the time of sale by the notary Matteo de Oliva. Matteo declared that Maddalena had been healthy up to the date of the sale and so the buyer Cosmo de Lazarino agreed to accept “all the risk and financial loss” that might result from the pregnancy, which included any injury, including death, incurred by either the pregnant woman or her unborn child.[[34\]](#_ftn34) In certain rare cases, the sales contract for an enslaved and pregnant woman contained some form of guarantee or monetary coverage in case of her death. In the autumn of 1455, for example, an enslaved Russian woman named Maddalena was sold by the nobleman Antonio Grillo to the merchant Niccolò de Guizo for 131 Genoese lire. She was declared as healthy and pregnant in the exception clause and with the condition that “in the case that she dies from this pregnancy... Antonio will return and restore” an amount of 31 Genoese lire to Niccolò.[[35\]](#_ftn35) In this case we see a rudimentary and nascent form of what would become actuarial science, where the likelihood that the enslaved Maddalena should perish in childbirth was quantitatively expressed as a fraction of her perceived economic value. In this manner we see how pregnancy was transformed from a physiological condition to an economic condition. Numerous studies have illustrated the intersection between actuarial science and slavery during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries and further research on valuation and slavery in the Genoese Mediterranean might situate the emergence of this intersection at a much earlier date.[[36\]](#_ftn36)

Miscarriage was also persistent concern for women in the premodern era and any unusual menstrual issues were interpreted as possible signs that a woman might not be able carry children through term. These menstrual problems were undoubtedly experienced by enslaved women in a disproportionate manner due to malnutrition and harsh working conditions.[[37\]](#_ftn37) The male slaveholders of enslaved women might not have known much about menstrual issues, but they knew enough to ensure that they were noted in the contract. These concerns were also noted in the exception clause at the end of the declaration of health in order to avoid any future disputes.[[38\]](#_ftn38) In the autumn of 1490, for example, an enslaved Bosnian woman named Melica was sold to the merchant Galeazzo Pasqua. Melica was declared by the widowed Giacoba de Oliva—the spouse of the recently deceased Girolamo Garbarino—as healthy but suffering from bad menstrual bleeding. In this case it was possible that she might have suffered a miscarriage. The notary thus appended this particular condition to the health clause, protecting the seller Giacoba from liability for any future health issues that might arise on account of Melica’s bleeding.[[39\]](#_ftn39) In another example from the spring of 1456, an enslaved Circassian woman named Margarita was sold by the silk merchant Costantino Riccio to the mercer Benedetto Bogiolo. Margarita was declared by Costantino as healthy with the exception that “she cannot hear that well and sometimes suffers from menstrual cramps in her stomach.”[[40\]](#_ftn40) Her problems with hearing might have been associated with the condition of tinnitus, which current medical research indicates as affecting approximately one in three pregnant women.[[41\]](#_ftn41) The exception clause, in this case, would have prevented Benedetto from contesting the sale at some later date based on any problems related to either hearing or menstruation. In both the above cases, furthermore, the assertion of these health issues might have allowed the buyers to negotiate lower prices for the enslaved women. A similar case occurred in a sale from the spring of 1457, in which an enslaved Circassian woman named Nestasia was sold by the merchant Pietro de Franciscis to the physician Battista Bonivento. The contract specified that Nestasia was “healthy and in good condition... especially her menstruation” and that “Nestasia will persevere with ordinary menstruation for the next year and a day.”[[42\]](#_ftn42) The notary did not indicate why the contract provided a guarantee that Nestasia would continue to menstruate regularly, but the sale to Battista, who as a doctor of medicine was supposedly knowledgeable about such affairs, suggests that he might have wanted her to become pregnant in the near future, perhaps to provide children for himself or someone who had obtained his services, or to serve his family as a wet nurse.

Declarations relating to pregnancy and menstruation in sales and leasing contracts were a mechanism for transactors to protect themselves from the possibility of future disputes and litigation. The identification of these declarations through the close reading of contracts relating to the exchange of enslaved persons provides glimpses into the quotidian health issues experienced by these persons in the late medieval Genoese Mediterranean. These declarations represent an unexplored source for social history, economic history, and the history of medicine, and deserve to be studied in further detail.

## 10.3 The clothing of enslaved persons

The clothing of enslaved people is another understudied aspect of the late medieval Mediterranean world. The traditional sources have been sumptuary laws—which generally focus on decrees on what the enslaved must not wear—as well as sources from literary and art history.[[43\]](#_ftn43) The Florentine humanist Leon Battista Alberti suggested that the clothing for household servants should reflect their status within the household.[[44\]](#_ftn44) The art historian Carole Frick also points to the fresco of Benozzo Gozzoli as illustrative of the typical clothing of servants and enslaved women in fifteenth century Florence.[[45\]](#_ftn45)

[ image 100013A1.jpg ]

Figure 55: Typical servant dress in Florence, ca. 1450 [[46\]](#_ftn46) 

The exception clause that described the health of an enslaved man or woman in a notarial contract was sometimes appended with an additional sub-clause referring to their clothing. In the spring of 1478, for example, an enslaved Circassian woman named Caterina was sold by the merchant Battista Costa to the nobleman Stefano Spinola. Caterina was declared as being in good health and that she would also be “given and consigned... by Battista with all her clothes and robes.”[[47\]](#_ftn47) The clothing of an enslaved person could also be declared in an “as-is” condition—like the declaration of health itself—and thus indicative of clothing in less than ideal condition. In the spring of 1429, for example, an enslaved Russian woman named Maddalena was sold by the merchant Antonio de Pastino to the priest Luciano de Massa. The contract explicitly stated that *both* Maddalena and her clothes were sold in an “as-is” condition, suggesting that Antonio was certainly not treating Maddalena very well.[[48\]](#_ftn48) These contracts would sometimes describe the provenance or value of the clothing in considerable detail. In another contract from the summer of 1446, an enslaved Russian woman named Margarita was sold by the merchant Franco Priano to the tailor Giacomo de Plebe. The sale was conducted at public auction. The contract stated that Margarita was sold with her clothes and that she had been purchased at an earlier date from the lawyer Stefano Bassadone and, furthermore, that the brothers had recorded the transaction in the account book of the commercial broker Bartolomeo de Cicliano. The contract also stated that the clothing was mentioned in an earlier act recorded by the notary Quirico Serravalle. The enacting notary Tommaso Duracino did not record the date of the specific contract enacted by his colleague Quirico, but it is very likely that an extracted copy of the contract was presented to him as evidence during the drafting of the sale.[[49\]](#_ftn49) This wealth of detail concerning the history of the clothing worn by Margarita suggests that these garments had considerable value and that the buyer Giacomo de Plebe wanted to have a legal record of their provenance. Giacomo was also a tailor and would have recognized the value of good clothing. The high value of clothes worn by some enslaved persons was also reflected in another contract enacted in the spring of 1467, in which an enslaved Russian woman named Maria was sold by the barber Bartolomeo Corso to a coat-maker Matteo de Lernia. The contract stated that Maria was sold “with all of her clothes, estimated and valued at thirty Genoese lire.”[[50\]](#_ftn50) These was a considerable value for clothing and it might indicate that special garments were procured for her by Bartolomeo, and as such, it would have been in the interest of the buyer and the seller to include them as items in the contract.

These examples might lead the historian to postulate that some enslaved persons sold in the city of Genoa may have been sold without their clothing—and perhaps even in a naked state. This would certainly have been a very humiliating experience, particularly if the sale had occurred in public. But these men and women were probably wearing some form of rudimentary inexpensive clothing, perhaps the so-called coarse woolen cloaks called *sclavine* (or “schiavine” in Italian), the very name of which suggests their intention as an appropriate item of clothing for the enslaved.[[51\]](#_ftn51) Having clothing with them would not necessarily have exempted enslaved persons from having to appear naked at some point before prospective slaveholders. In his visit to the Genoese colony of Caffa in 1438, the Castilian traveler Pero Tafur described the process by which enslaved persons were sold there:

> The sellers make the slaves strip to the skin, males as well as females, and they put on them a cloak of felt, and the price is named. Afterwards they throw off their coverings, and make them walk up and down to show whether they have any bodily defect...[[52\]](#_ftn52)

It seems possible that a similar process may have taken place when enslaved persons were unloaded in the port of Genoa: the declaration of health certainly entailed some degree of bodily violation, notably some form of physical examination of the enslaved. But it seems rather unlikely that enslaved men or women were paraded around naked in public during the process of exchange, as there appears to be no contemporary reportage of such a phenomenon occurring in Genoa. The purchase and possession of enslaved women can also be interpreted as examples of what the sociologist Thorstein Veblen termed objects of “conspicuous consumption”.[[53\]](#_ftn53) The rapid increase in the rate of slaveholding from the middle of the fourteenth century paralleled the similarly rapid increase in the wealth of the *nobiles* families. The enslaved women held by these families not only laboured as household servants, but they also served as material signifiers of the wealth and prestige of the slaveholder. As Steven Epstein has noted, there was no particular economic incentive for holding enslaved women as household servants over paying impoverished free women to perform the same work.[[54\]](#_ftn54) Men and women from *artefices* and *mercantes* families were also the holders of a large proportion of enslaved women,[[55\]](#_ftn55) so just holding an enslaved man or woman was not always sufficient to visually signify power and wealth. The large numbers of artisans from *populares* families would have made it necessary for the wealthy slaveholders from *nobiles* families to dress their enslaved persons in clothing that also signified the prestige of the family which held them, much in the manner that early modern courts would later cloth their courtiers and servants in various forms of livery. Jacques Heers provides an example of how the widowed Pomellina Piccamiglio, the spouse of the deceased Luciano Spinola, purchased a portion of vermilion cloth worth two and a half Genoese lire to have a dress made for an enslaved woman named Sofia who worked as her household servant.[[56\]](#_ftn56) This was an expensive fabric and generally worn only by members of the wealthy elite. This practice of dressing enslaved persons in such fabrics might account for the rather valuable assessments of clothing described in the contracts above.

Heers also notes of the increased proliferation of Genoese sumptuary laws during the fifteenth century and suggests that some of the primary motivations for these laws were to discourage merchants from hoarding precious metal and to discourage wasteful spending on luxury goods in favour of towards productive investment in commerce.[[57\]](#_ftn57) Many of these laws specifically targeted enslaved persons, suggesting that moral quandaries over the outward appearance of the enslaved in public spaces were also motivational factors behind these laws. A proclamation issued in 1449 prohibited enslaved and formerly enslaved women, whether they had been married or were single, to wear silk garments. This proclamation also forbade them from wearing clothing whose train was greater than four fingers in length.[[58\]](#_ftn58) Another proclamation issued in 1512 expanded these restrictions to include hair nets, certain types of dresses, and excessively long sleeves. Emilio Pandiani has also noted that the prohibition against enslaved women wearing silk garments was expanded in the early sixteenth century to include garments made from Flemish cloth.[[59\]](#_ftn59) The increasingly restrictive nature of these laws over time illustrates an increased desire to differentiate the enslaved, the formerly enslaved, and poor free servants from the remainder of society. These laws provide another illustration, therefore, that enslaved persons were increasingly used as signifiers of conspicuous consumption by increasingly wealthy elites.

It was an obligation of the receiver to ensure that the enslaved man or woman was properly clothed during the term of their lease in leasing contracts. In the summer of 1446, for example, an enslaved Russian woman named Maria, held by the merchant Barnaba Tagliavacca, who had come to Genoa from the commune of Busalla,[[60\]](#_ftn60) was leased out to the merchant Niccolò Musso, a citizen of Savona, for a term of seven and a half years. The contract specified that Barnaba would receive the payment in money of account and “other things” and that Niccolò agreed to provide food, clothing, and shoes for Maria, whether she remained healthy or infirm, for the duration of the contract.[[61\]](#_ftn61) In another contract from the spring of 1427, an enslaved Circassian woman named Divisia was leased out by the merchant Battista de Benisia to the metal worker Lodisio Delfino for a term of six years. The contract specified that Lodisio would provide food, clothes, and shoes to Divisia according to the “customs of household servants” and that she must be returned healthy and without any illness at the end of the lease.[[62\]](#_ftn62) Although the notary did not describe what was meant by the custom of dress for servants, the inclusion of the phrase indicates that there was certain expectation regarding the dress of enslaved women working as household. It suggests that there were minimum standards required for the demonstration of wealth, but maximum standards as well, dictated by the increasingly stringent sumptuary laws of late medieval Genoa discussed earlier.

There were contracts where an enslaved man or woman was leased with their own clothing or with the condition that the receiver was not obligated to provide clothing. In the summer of 1453, for example, an enslaved Russian woman named Maria was leased out by the innkeeper Niccolò Montanaro to the merchant Bartolomeo Costa for a term of five years. The contract specified that Maria would have her own clothes and that they were intended for her own use.[[63\]](#_ftn63) This was an unusual clause and its inclusion probably indicated that the innkeeper had previous disputes with receivers when leasing enslaved women—perhaps even the same Maria—along with their clothing. In a similar example from the summer of 1459, an enslaved Russian named Caterina was leased out by the cloth merchant Girolamo Calvo to the merchant Paolo de Promontorio for a term of two years. This contract also specified that the yet to be determined remuneration would be based upon earlier agreements between the two principal contractors. In this case it appears that the lease was made to cover some earlier accrued debts. It was furthermore declared that Caterina was leased with her own clothes, money, and other goods, which provides additional support to the notion that she was leased to cover a debt, since all the expenses of housing, feeding, and clothing Caterina seem to have covered by the lender, which was not usually the case.[[64\]](#_ftn64) In another contract from the summer of 1473, an enslaved Russian child named Maria was leased out by the merchant Melchiorre de Monleone to the merchant Pietro Orbone for a term of four years. The contract obligated Pietro to provide Maria with food and shoes for the duration of the lease—but not with clothing.[[65\]](#_ftn65) It might be tempting for the modern historian to assume that the notary forgot to include the wording regarding clothing, but it is always important to heed the warning of John Pryor that medieval notaries had no incentive for inaccuracy and that the historian carefully consider “the significance of each particular clause, formula, and term” in business contracts.[[66\]](#_ftn66) In a final example from the autumn of 1467, an enslaved man named Giorgio was leased out by the nobleman Paolo Doria leased out to the *nobiles* merchant Lorenzo Cattaneo for a term of two and a half years. The lease specified that Giorgio would have to serve as a forced labourer on the vessel belonging to Lorenzo: a vessel whose voyages were patronized by the aforementioned Paolo. The contract also specified that Lorenzo was not obligated to provide any clothing for Giorgio, a clause that implied that Paolo would have already provided clothing for him.[[67\]](#_ftn67) It might be assumed that the responsibly of providing clothing for Giorgio was part of the conditions of patronage for the vessel. It might have also been the case that Paolo also wanted to have someone monitor the voyage in which he had invested and placed this responsibility upon Giorgio.

The exception clause in sales and leasing contracts offers new insights into the clothing of enslaved women and their everyday appearance in the public sphere of the late medieval Genoese Mediterranean. It also indicates the expectations of slaveholders regarding the provision of clothing, raises interesting questions about why clothing was related to health, and represents another understudied source for social, economic, and material history.

## 10.4 Slavery and sexual exploitation

The language of legal discourse in the late medieval Genoese sources reflects legally sanctioned and customary characters of sexual exploitation of enslaved women by their holders—and by other members of their extended family—in Genoese society. This section considers how notarial contracts both reflect and reinforce this exploitation with the important caveat that this study does not concur with the position of these documents. The records were created by and reflect the views of the slaveholders and were largely silent on reflecting the voices of the enslaved. A significant amount archival research remains to properly uncover these voices. 

The children arising from the sexual exploitation of enslaved women inherited the unfree social status of their mothers in Genoese law. They remained the legal property of the slaveholder and represented a valuable financial asset.[[68\]](#_ftn68) The possibility of pregnancy would not have thus represented a significant deterrent for the slaveholder: on the contrary, it could have been seen as an opportunity for considerable financial gain. And the leasing of enslaved women as wet nurses following childbirth might have provided yet another financial incentive for the regular sexual exploitation of these enslaved women. These enslaved women not only faced the possibility of sexual exploitation by their holders, but also from any man with whom they came into contact. The customary and commonplace view of enslaved women as acceptable objects of exploitation was driven by several social, cultural, and legal factors. Their social and legal status as enslaved persons transformed them from animate human beings into inanimate items of property.[[69\]](#_ftn69) The cultural and religious ‘otherness’ of enslaved women also served to intensify the prevalence of this social phenomenon. The statutes of the commune of Genoa codified in the early fifteenth century reveal the widespread prevalence of enslaved women becoming pregnant—voluntarily and involuntarily—through contact with persons who were not associated with the family of their holders. These statutes specify a series of financial penalties for this transgression.

If an enslaved woman was impregnated by an enslaved man, then the slaveholder of that man was required to pay a fine of 25 Genoese lire to the holder of the woman. If a free citizen impregnated an enslaved woman, then he was required to pay a fine of 25 Genoese lire to the holder of the woman, and if she died as a result of childbirth, he was required to pay an additional 50 lire.[[70\]](#_ftn70) These statutes illustrate that the state viewed the slaveholders as the victims of the sexual exploitation of their enslaved women and not the women themselves. In the summer of 1456, for example, a certain Giovanni de Mozafico, representing the slaveholder and notary Cristoforo de Salvo, testified before the *Officium sindicatorum* that a Dominican monk Tommaso de Nuceto had sexually assaulted and impregnated an enslaved Abkhazan named Margarita. The monk replied that the Margarita was not honest and trustworthy and, to provide evidence of her immorality, also suggested that she was a prostitute and frequent visitor of many employees of the ducal palace.[[71\]](#_ftn71) The sentence of the *sindicatores* has yet to be located but one would not be surprised if they sided with Tommaso in this case and there was no fine.

The opening clause in the *corpus* of sales and leasing contracts delineated the rights of the buyer over the object of sale. This rights clause had its origin with regards to the exchange of standard economic objects in the twelfth century and was incorporated without change when specialized contracts for the exchange of enslaved persons were developed in the subsequent centuries. In the summer of 1453, for example, an enslaved Circassian man named Pietro was sold by the merchant Pietro Grillo, an inhabitant of the commune of Voltri, to the boot maker Gabriele de Corvaria. The contract contained the following statement which gave the buyer the right

> to have, to hold, to enjoy, to possess, to use, to sell, and to alienate... in perpetuity...[[72\]](#_ftn72)

the enslaved Pietro. This statement, and numerous variations upon it, was common in all types of sales and leasing contracts in late medieval Genoa and was intended to consolidate the rights of buyers by giving them complete dominion over the purchased item.[[73\]](#_ftn73) Steven Epstein has suggested that the inclusion of the Latin phrase *ad gaudendum* (meaning “to enjoy”) in sales and leasing contracts for enslaved persons was indicative “that sexual exploitation was on the minds of the buyer and seller.”[[74\]](#_ftn74) He describes a legal case where the fifteenth century Genoese lawyer Bartolomeo de Bosco represented the heirs of a deceased slaveholder in a dispute over the legal status of an enslaved woman who had served in his household. In this case, the heirs of the deceased Pasquale Rattone were attempting to claim the enslaved Agnese as part of their inheritance. Their lawsuit was vigorously contested by Agnese, who testified that she had been manumitted after providing Pasquale with a son and, furthermore, that she continued to live with Pasquale in a consensual relationship until his death. She also presciently testified that she was not listed as an item of property in his testament and thus not subject to be handed over to the heirs as an enslaved woman. But Agnese was not able to produce a contract of manumission to the court, so Bartolomeo argued that she should remain the property of the estate and that she fell into the ‘remainder of goods’ clause of the testament. He also argued that any sexual relations between Agnese and Pasquale did not provide sufficient evidence of a proper consensual relationship between the two. He testified that the deceased Pasquale

> did not hold her, cohabit with her, or wish to have her as in his home as a concubine, but as a slave, in the custom of the enslaved...

This so-called “custom of the enslaved” allowed Pasquale to legally exploit Agnese as an item of property.[[75\]](#_ftn75) The subtext here is that the purchase of enslaved women for sexual gratification—‘to enjoy’—was not only a legal right but a common occurrence, a civic custom in late medieval Genoese Mediterranean. It should also be noted that participation in the market economy of slavery was not only an issue of jurisprudence for Bartolomeo Bosco. He was a slaveholder himself, having held at least one enslaved person: an enslaved Abkhazan man named Calì, whom he had leased to the merchant Agostino de Pinu in the autumn of 1432.[[76\]](#_ftn76)

The case of Agnese illustrates the brutal imbalance of power ensured by the rights clause. This clause, and variations upon it, appeared in almost every contract for the sale of an enslaved man or woman. In some of these cases it appeared to have been a *post hoc* insertion, crammed into a small space between the declaration of health and declaration of price.[[77\]](#_ftn77) This suggests that the clause was sometimes a hasty last-minute insertion—most likely on demand of the buyer, given that it emphasized his or her rights—after the initial contract had been drafted by the notary but before its final approval by the transactors. Sometimes this clause was written in different hand than that of the notary, which also suggests a *post hoc* insertion. In these cases, it was probably during the time when the notary was preparing the extracted copy of the contract on parchment for the seller, and so the task would have been assigned to his apprentice.[[78\]](#_ftn78) There are also some instances where the rights of the buyer were given an additional emphasis that reiterated the dehumanization of the enslaved person as mere property. In the autumn of 1471, for example, an enslaved Hungarian woman named Elena was sold by the nuns Brigida and Battistina Spinola from the monastery of Santa Barnaba. The contract contained an additional statement that the buyer and silk worker Stefano de Clavaro could “do and dispose with her as he would...”[[79\]](#_ftn79) There was no moral or pious concern here for any calamities that might befall to Elena in her future labours in the home or workshop of Stefano. In all these cases, the clause fixed and ensured the transfer of complete rights over all aspects of the life of the enslaved person as an item of movable property to the buyer.

The rights clause in sales and leasing contracts suggests that the sexual exploitation of enslaved women was not only commonplace in the late medieval Genoese Mediterranean, but that it was also legally sanctioned as an inalienable right of the slaveholder. It provides another facet in the sordid history of the sexual abuse of enslaved women. The commonplace nature of this abuse was reflected in the numerous life insurance contracts enacted for enslaved pregnant women during the fifteenth century that were studied in detail in Chapter 7.

## 10.5 The social control of enslaved men and women

The presence of enslaved persons in the streets and squares of the Genoese public sphere was a persistent concern of the state administration during the late fourteenth and fifteenth centuries. It was also a concern for slaveholders who desired to strictly regulate the activities of the enslaved persons in their possession. The sales and leasing contracts for enslaved persons offer novel insights into this desire to monitor and restrict the movements of the enslaved.

The social activities of enslaved men and women named in in sales contracts could be restricted by additional conditional clauses to *post facto* restricted their movement in the urban and rural sphere. This extension of social control beyond the period of *de iure* ownership was seen in the contract from the spring of 1467 in which an enslaved Russian woman named Maria was sold by the barber Bartolomeo Corso to the coat-maker Matteo de Lernia. In this sale, the following condition was inserted into the confirmation clause of the *grossus*:

> Enacted... with the solemnly expressed and legally valid pact that the aforementioned Matteo cannot and is not allowed to sell, alienate or in any way send her to any place outside of Genoa without the expressed permission of the aforementioned Bartolomeo...[[80\]](#_ftn80)

If at some future date Matteo should request to move with Maria outside Genoa, and Bartolomeo should refuse, then Bartolomeo would agree to take back Maria into his possession and return the purchase price to Matteo. This condition might be a reflection that Bartolomeo feared that Maria would attempt to escape her captor if she were brought outside the city walls. Perhaps she had even attempted such an escape on an earlier occasion. But this raises the question: why would he care since he was no longer holding Maria in captivity? The notary was customarily silent about the motivations for this unusual condition, but it might suggest a close relationship between the two, perhaps even a conjugal one. It might also be the case that Maria had a child that was living with her former slaveholder Bartolomeo and that one or both wanted to keep the two together. This is historical speculation, of course, but there had to be some compelling reason for this rather unusual condition.

In another contract enacted in the spring of 1475, an enslaved woman named Caterina was sold by the merchant Paolo Boisardo to the nobleman Giacomo di Negro, under the condition that Giacomo could not hold her in the city of Genoa, its suburban region, or in any of its surrounding villages, without the consent of the nobleman Francesco Lomellini.[[81\]](#_ftn81) It was furthermore declared that Giacomo could not defend her against the consent enforced by Francesco. This sale has two interesting features that differentiate it from the previous example. The movement of Caterina, first of all, was restricted to the boundaries of Genoa and its regional possessions, as opposed to the earlier sale where Maria was not permitted to leave the urban boundaries of the city of Genoa. The consent to break the condition of the first sale, secondly, was given to the seller and original slaveholder, whereas the consent specified in the second sale was the right of a third party. The notary did not supply any rationale why Caterina could not be held within the city of Genoa or its immediate locales although some possible explanations may be deduced. It might have been the case that Maria committed some offense against Francesco or his family, so he put pressure on Paolo Boisardo to have her exiled from the city by selling her. It might also be that Francesco committed some offense against Maria and similarly forced her removal from the city in order to prevent embarrassment to himself or damage the social reputation of his albergo. This second explanation may be the more likely one given the power dynamics of the relationship.

These forms of social control were also specified in the conditions of leasing contracts, where they were far more common. The receiver in a leasing contract did not have the same degree of personal control over the enslaved, as they were not the owner *de iure* and thus did not hold absolute authority over them. In the winter of 1393, for example, an enslaved Circassian woman named Maddalena was leased out by the leather worker Bartolomeo de Vulturo, from the commune of Voltri, to the merchant Raffaele Torre for a term of three years. The contract specified that Maddalena was to serve as a wet nurse for the family of Raffaele and that he would not be able to break the contract should she be unable to adequately nurse his child. This contract also contained an unusually detailed obligation that limited her movement within four defined regions: the city of Genoa, the town of Voltri, and the rural region of the Bisagno and Polcevera valleys. This proscribed her movement to the towns in which both the lender and the receiver of the contract resided, as well as the two valleys which flanked the western and eastern end of the city of Genoa. The contract finally specified a fine of 20 ducats should Maddalena break this restriction.[[82\]](#_ftn82) The contract did not record the rationale behind this restriction, as usual, but like many similar restrictions on movement, the motivation seems to have been fear of flight. The receiver Raffaele was in the service of the papacy and had worked as a messenger between the dioceses in Liguria and the Papal See in Rome.[[83\]](#_ftn83) The lender Bartolomeo might have been concerned, therefore, that Maddalena could be brought to Rome by Raffaele, a change of locale which could offer a better chance of her gaining her freedom by flight. Rome was not necessarily an easier place to escape captivity, but it would be much easier for Maddalena to remain escaped should she successfully break the reins of her bondage. It would be nearly impossible for a local Genoese artisan like Bartolomeo to return her to captivity from such a distance, as the process would require contacts in Rome who could be hired to search for Maddalena. It would have been unlikely that the leather worker had either the economic means or social connections to finance such an endeavour.

An even stronger restriction of movement is seen in a contract enacted in spring of 1427 where an enslaved woman named Anna was leased out by the merchant Pietro Facorio to the grammar teacher Tommaso de Roma for a term of three years. The contract specified that she was leased for the purpose of wet nursing and indicated that she had been formerly held by the nobleman Antonio Camilla who was now deceased. Along with the common obligation to provide Anna with food, clothing, and shoes, the contract also stated that Anna was forbidden to live in the *Schutarie* neighbourhood: this was the neighbourhood of the Camilla or Lercari families.[[84\]](#_ftn84) If Pietro should, furthermore, discover that Anna was living in any of those districts during the term of the contract, then he would be allowed to take her back from Tommaso without compensation.[[85\]](#_ftn85) This restriction suggests some underlying social tensions between the enslaved and her holders. In particular, the specific naming of the deceased Antonio Camilla as the former holder of Anna and the restriction from the neighbourhood where the Camilla family had their houses and loggia suggest that there were tensions between the two parties. First, Antonio was a powerful and influential figure in the political and commercial world of early fifteenth century Genoa. He served on the councils of the *sindicatores* and the *antianorum* on multiple occasions and was active in the insurance of Mediterranean commerce.[[86\]](#_ftn86) Second, Steven Epstein has shown that the sexual exploitation of enslaved women was not only legal but commonplace in late medieval Italy.[[87\]](#_ftn87) At the time of the lease Anna must have recently given birth, or about to give birth, since she was leased to serve as a wet nurse. It is reasonable to postulate that she might have become pregnant by the actions of someone from the Camilla albergo, perhaps even her former holder Antonio, who had recently passed away. If so, then the sons and testamentary heirs of Antonio might have wanted to ensure that Anna was kept out of sight by selling her to Pietro Facorio and with an agreement that she be kept away from the neighbourhood frequented by members of the Camilla albergo.[[88\]](#_ftn88) This would have served a two-fold purpose: first, to erase the memory, and the attendant shame, of Antonio or another noble Camilla having a child with an enslaved woman, and second, to prevent any future contact that might result in further sexual relations or hereditary claims, one or both of which might be worries for the family. There was also a reflection of the concepts of honour and shame which Julian Pitt-Rivers suggests were an essential sociocultural component of late medieval Mediterranean society.[[89\]](#_ftn89) Epstein again notes how the fifteenth century Florentine chronicler Giovanni Morelli would not refer by name to the children born to his uncle Bartolomeo Morelli and an enslaved woman that he had held, having been embarrassed that the noble Bartolomeo had decided to raise these illegitimate children as he would his own.[[90\]](#_ftn90) It is important to note that Giovanni was not ashamed about the actual act of sexual congress between his uncle and the enslaved woman. This was common and customary practice, as we have seen. It was instead the public embracing of these illegitimate children as free persons and *familiares*, rather than discretely selling them off as enslaved persons, which was the shameful act.

These cases illustrate how commercial contracts—as legally binding documents—could sometimes enhance and expand the forms of social control on the spatial and temporal movements of the enslaved already codified in local statutes. The movements of the enslaved within the public sphere were thus restricted in a threefold manner: by command of the slaveholder, by legal statutes, and by any expressed desires of former slaveholders. The analysis of these sales and leasing contracts, furthermore, offers an insight into the desires of the slaveholder in restricting the movements of the enslaved persons that they held. These restrictions, which were the expressed unwritten commands of the slaveholder, were sometimes transformed into written commands in these contracts, which can thus offer glimpses into the unseen mindsets of slaveholders and why they might restrict movements on the enslaved.

## 10.6 The perils of enslavement: illness and death

The omnipresence of death has long been a central theme of late medieval history. The enslaved persons in the Genoese Mediterranean also faced this fear on a regular basis. The unremitting exploitation of the enslaved by slaveholders certainly made them more susceptible to succumbing to death. The conditions specified in sales, leasing, and insurance contracts offer additional insights into this fear, albeit from the viewpoint of the slaveholder, for whom the death of an enslaved man or woman was a financial calamity rather than an existential one.

The corpus of the contracts for enslaved persons would sometimes declare certain risks pertaining to the exchange: risks which were almost always assumed by the receiver. The examination of the leasing of enslaved women as wet nurses in Chapter 11 elucidates one form of this declaration: the risk that an enslaved woman would be unwilling or unable to sufficiently nurse the child or children of the receiver.[[91\]](#_ftn91) Similar declarations were sometimes made for the risks of flight, illness, or death. In the summer of 1435, for example, an enslaved Abkhazan named Caterina was leased out by the merchant Andrea Vivaldi to the nobleman Cosmo Salvago for a term of three years. The contract specified that Caterina was leased for the purpose of wet nursing and that the Cosmo would assume the risk that she might not be able to sufficiently nurse his child. The health of Caterina was also declared as *talem qualem est*—so she was probably not in the best of health—and, furthermore, Andrea agreed to assume all risk of possible flight or death. Should Caterina manage, therefore, to escape her captivity during the term of the lease, Cosmo would remain responsible for payment for the entire three-year term. And should Caterina succumb to illness and pass away during the term of the lease, then Cosmo would likewise still have to pay for the entire term.[[92\]](#_ftn92)

In many cases where the lease was for a relatively short term, the assumption of the risk of illness or death would have represented a minor economic loss to the slaveholder if such an unfortunate event occurred. In the spring of 1461, for example, an enslaved Circassian woman named Maddalena was leased out by the cheesemaker Michele de Turrilia to the merchant Antonio de Ferrari. The term of the contract was one year and stated that the risk of Maddalena succumbing to illness or death would be assumed by the receiver Antonio. If Maddalena had died, the loss of the forced labour that she provided to Antonio would have probably been more onerous that the loss of the 12 Genoese lire that he paid to Michele.[[93\]](#_ftn93) These types of short-term leases seemed to have been used by Michele to maximize the capital he obtained from holding Maddalena. This lease occurred only nine months after Maddalena had been leased to the notary Agostino Botto who was the procurator for Antonio de Ferrari. It appears that Agostino wanted to end the lease early and was willing to lose the three months of service for which he had paid. The record is silent, as usual, about the motivations and they difficult to determine in this case.[[94\]](#_ftn94) For the more common long-term leases of ten years or more, however, the sickness or death of an enslaved man or woman might represent a considerable cost to the receiver. In the autumn of 1473, for example, an enslaved Circassian woman named Maddalena was leased out by the widowed Mariola de Turrilia—the wife of the deceased Bartolomeo de Levante—to the recently widowed Despina Pinelli for a term of twelve years. The contract specified any risk of death of the enslaved Maddalena would be assumed by Despina and that Mariola would not be obligated to return any reimbursement to Despina should Maddalena pass away.[[95\]](#_ftn95) In this case, the risk assumed by Despina is considerably higher: up to 150 Genoese lire, the price specified in the contract. The contract also contains another unusual condition. It stated that should Maddalena become pregnant during the term of the lease—a distinct possibility given that she was only twenty-eight years of age—then Despina would not be permitted to exploit her as a wet nurse. The holder Mariola wanted to be able to take advantage, it seems, of any extra capital that she might procure from the occurrence of such an event.

**

The social world and daily experiences of enslaved persons in the late medieval Genoese Mediterranean remains largely hidden behind a veil of linguistic distortion. The small number of existing sources are from the viewpoints of slaveholders and other elites, who too often paint lurid and sensationalist misrepresentations of this social fabric. This chapter illustrates that a close and contextual reading of notarial contracts offers additional glimpses, albeit brief, into this largely hidden world. The enslaved persons of the Genoese Mediterranean faced unique health challenges that were sometimes noted in sales and leasing contracts. The contracts could offer insights into their clothing and appearance, and concerns expressed over the provenance and ownership of clothing revealed the tension between well-dressed enslaved persons and state and moral actors who wanted their dress to reflect their status. The analysis of the rights afforded to slaveholders reflects the legitimation of a world of persistent sexual exploitation and the analysis of clauses that delineated social movement also suggested implicit relationships between enslaved men and women and free persons. The social landscape of the late medieval Genoese Mediterranean was often fraught with danger and peril, and this was felt to an even greater degree by the mass of enslaved persons hidden in its shadows.

------

[[1\]](#_ftnref1) Virginia King and Kenneth Kiple, *Another Dimension to the Black Diaspora: Diet, Disease, and Racism* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1981), pp. 74–95.

[[2\]](#_ftnref2) For example, see Mohammed Khudabux, “Effects of Life Conditions on the Health of a Negro Slave Community in Suriname,” in *African Sites: Archaeology in the Caribbean*, ed. Jay Haviser (Princeton: Markus Weiner Publishers, 1999), pp. 291–312; Robert Margo and Richard Steckel, “The Heights of American Slaves: New Evidence on Slave Nutrition and Health,” *Social Science History* 6, no. 4 (1982), pp. 516–38; Philip Coelho and Robert McGuire, “Diets versus Diseases: The Anthropometrics of Slave Children,” *The Journal of Economic History* 60, no. 1 (2000), pp. 232–46.

[[3\]](#_ftnref3) ASGe, Notai antichi 890, Tommaso Duracino, filza 3, series I, nr. 150, dated 1457-05-24, where “Albertus de Nigro civis Ianue quondam Damiani... vendidit et titulo et ex causa vendicionis dedit et consignavit Iohanni de Amatis civi Venetiarum quondam Ieronimi... quandam sclavam dicti Alberti nominatam Margarita ectatis annorum viginti duorum vel circa de progenie Rubeorum sanam et nitidam ab omnibus viciis et magagnis ocultis et manifestis secundum morem et consuetudinem civitatis Ianue...”

[[4\]](#_ftnref4) ASGe, Notai antichi 890, Tommaso Duracino, filza 3, series I, nr. 164, dated 1457-06-01, where “Lucas Arbiconus civis Ianue quondam Phillipi... vendidit et titulo et ex causa venditionis dedit et consignavit Nicolao Tasorelo pancogelo civi Ianue Iohannis...quandam sclavam ipsius Luce et seu heredum quondam Terami Arbiconi patrum ipsius Luce et cuius hereditatis dictus Lucas aserit esse curatorem nominatam Caterina de progenie Tartarorum ectatis annorum triginta quinque vel circa talem qualem est...”

[[5\]](#_ftnref5) ASGe, Notai antichi 587, Antonio Fazio, filza 13, series I, nr. 77, dated 1447-05-16, where “Luca de Furnariis civis Ianue dominus et patronus Lucie eius sclave etatis annorum viginti sex in circa de progenie Tartarorum locavit et pensionavit et titulo locacionis et pensionis dedit et concessit Iohanni Iustiniano quondam Danielis civi Ianue... ad annos decem proxime venturos dictam sclavam talem qualem est...”

[[6\]](#_ftnref6) ASGe, Notai antichi 894, Tommaso Duracino, filza 7, series II, nr. 197, dated 1464-09-24, where “Georgius de Clavaro civis Ianue quondam Cosme... vendidit et titulo et ex causa vendiconis dedit Sanchio de Curqules Michaelis civi et mercatori Valincie Ianue comorantis... quandam sclavam ipsius Georgii nominatam Lucia de progenie Zichorum etatis annorum viginta vel circa sanam et nitidam ab omnibus viciis et magagnis occultis et manifestis secundum morem et consuetudinem civitatis Ianue... et que sclava stet et maneat rixico periculo et fortuna ipsius Georgii et hoc donec et quo usque dicta sclava sibi Sanchio vel persone suo legiptime fuerit data et consignata ut supra in dictam navem qua consignacoine facta dicta sclava stet et maneat rixico periculo et fortuna dicte Sanchii et non aliquo dicte Georgii...”

[[7\]](#_ftnref7) Luigi Tria, *La schiavitù in Liguria: ricerche e documenti* (Genova: Società ligure di storia patria, 1947), pp. 80–1.

[[8\]](#_ftnref8) Christoph Cluse, “Zur Repräsentation von Sklaven und Sklavinnen in Statuten und Notariatsinstrumenten italienischer Städte um 1400,” in *Fremde in der Stadt: Ordnungen, Repräsentationen und soziale Praktiken (13.–15. Jahrhundert)*, ed. Peter Bell (Frankfurt am Main: Lang, 2010), pp. 395–6.

[[9\]](#_ftnref9) Paul Krueger and Theodor Mommsen, eds., *Corpus juris civilis. Tomus I: Institutiones, Digesta* (Berlin: Weidmann, 1888), digesta XXI.I.21, p. 273: “Redhibere est facere, ut rursus habeat venditor quod habuerit, et quia reddendo id fiebat, idcirco redhibitio est appellata quasi redditio...”

[[10\]](#_ftnref10) Hannah Barker, “Purchasing a Slave in Fourteenth-Century Cairo: Ibn Al-Akfānī’s Book of Observation and Inspection in the Examination of Slaves,” *Mamluk Studies Review* 19 (2016), pp. 18–21.

[[11\]](#_ftnref11) Debra Blumenthal, *Enemies and Familiars: Slavery and Mastery in Fifteenth-Century Valencia* (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 2009), pp. 54–5.

[[12\]](#_ftnref12) Jenifer Barclay, *The Mark of Slavery: Disability, Race, and Gender in Antebellum America* (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 2021), p. 9.

[[13\]](#_ftnref13) ASGe, Notai antichi 890, Tommaso Duracino, filza 3, series II, nr. 242, dated 1458-11-24, where “Angelus de Marchexio civis Ianue quondam Antionii... vendidit... dedit tradidit et consignavit Angelo de Maiolo specario Thearmi... quandam sclavam dicti Angeli nominatam Maria de progenie Tartarorum ectatis annorum viginti quinque vel circa sanam et nitidam ab omnibus viciis et magagnis ocultis et manifestis secundem morem consuetudine civitatis Ianue excepto a claudicatione dicte Marie que claudicat...”

[[14\]](#_ftnref14) See the section beginning on page 131 for details regarding the nominal price trends for the enslaved.

[[15\]](#_ftnref15) ASGe, Notai antichi 890, Tommaso Duracino, filza 3, series II, nr. 287, dated 1458-12-21, where “Angelus de Marchexio civis Ianue quondam Antionii... vendidit et titulo et ex causa vendicionis dedit cessit et tradidit Gabrieli Risoto corrigiario civi Ianue quondam Lazari... quandam sclavam... nominatam Maria de progenie Tartarorum ectatis annorum viginti sex vel circa sanam et nitidam ab omnibus viciis et magagnis ocultis et manifestis secundum morem et consuetudinem civitatis Ianue excepto a claudicatione quam patitur...”

[[16\]](#_ftnref16) ASGe, Notai antichi 889, Tommaso Duracino, filza 2, series II, nr. 218, dated 1456-08-30, where “Paulus Spinula civis Ianue quondam Odoni... ad menses quinque... si quedam sclava dicti Angeli nominata Maria ectatis annorum viginti duorum vel circa, nunc gravida seu pregnans mensium sex vel circa de partu suo et de dicta eius gravidacione et pregnacione et occasione ipsius gravidacionis et pregnationis salva et viva evaserit...” See Chapter 10 for a detailed discussion on insurance contracts for enslaved pregnant women.

[[17\]](#_ftnref17) ASGe, Notai antichi 891, Tommaso Duracino, filza 4, nr. 138, dated 1459-04-04, where “Iacobum de Marchixio patrum dicti Angeli, requisivisse et requirere eidem Gabrieli ut dictam Mariam sclavam eidem Iacobo dicti libere dimittet et relaxet ispo Iacobo obtulente se peractum videlicet Gabriel dare et solvere dictas libras centum Ianue pretii dicte sclave hac potuissent actento quod dictis Iacobis absolvat et pretendat dictam Mariam sclavam esse ipsius Iacobis et ad eidem Iacobum pleno iure spectare et protinere et quod dictis Angelis non potuit dictam sclavam in per indicione ipsius Ianue vendere seu alienere.”

[[18\]](#_ftnref18) ASGe, Notai antichi 907, Tommaso Duracino, filza 20, nr. 672, dated 1477-12-10, where “Iohannes Maria de Monleone faber civis Ianue quondam Eligii... vendidit et titulo et ex causa vendicionis dedit tradidit et consignavit Iohanni Mangiavache seaterio civi Ianue quondam Nicolai... quandam sclavam dicti Iohannis Marie nominatam Caterinam de progenie Maurorum alborum ectatis annorum duodecim vel circa... Et quia dicta sclava videtur in capite habere sui pati malum tinee quad circa est annum... Quad dictus Iohannes Maria teneatur ellegere quendam medicum confidentem partibus qui videat et curet dictam infirmitatem tinee... et in quantum in dictum annum unum dictus talis medicus supra elligendus per dictas partes dictam sclavam a dicto tali mali tinee non curabit, seu liberabit, tunc et eo casu presentis vendicioni non sit locus...”

[[19\]](#_ftnref19) ASGe, Notai antichi 894, Tommaso Duracino, filza 7, series I, nr. 16, dated 1463-01-22, where “Baptista de Auria civis Ianue quondam Luciani... vendidit et titulo et ex causa vendicionis dedit et consignavit Iohanni Focoberte civi et mercatori maioricaris Ianue comoranti... quendam sclavum dicti Baptiste nominatum Iacobinus de progenie Canariorum ectatis annorum quatuordecim vel circa sanam et nitidiam ab omnibus viciis et magagnis ocultis et manifestis secundum morem et consuetudinem civitatis Ianue excepto ab infirmitate tinee quam dictis Iacobinnis patrior in capite...”

[[20\]](#_ftnref20) King and Kiple, *Another Dimension to the Black Diaspora*, pp. 74–9.

[[21\]](#_ftnref21) Ciro Bursztein, “Ringworm of the Scalp: The History of an Ancient Disease,” in *Ringworm and Irradiation: The Historical, Medical, and Legal Implications of the Forgotten Epidemic*, ed. Siegal Sadetzki and Shifra Shvarts (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2022), pp. 2–5; Theodore Rosenthal, “Perspectives in Ringworm of the Scalp: Treatment through the Ages,” *Archives of Dermatology* 82, no. 6 (1960), p. 851.

[[22\]](#_ftnref22) ASGe, Notai antichi 888, Tommaso Duracino, filza 1, series II, nr. 27, dated 1454-02-07, where “Donatus Bondenarius civis Ianue quondam Petri... locavit et titulo locacionis concessit et concedit Marcheto de Pelegro quondam Pelegri... quandam sclavam dicti Donati vocatam Caterina de progenie Rubeorum ectatis annorum viginti quinque in circa sanam et nitidam ab omnibus viciis et magagnis occultis et manifestis secundum morem et consuetudinem civitatis Ianue excepto a quodam signo seu perla quod seu quam dicta Caterina habet et tenet in quodam oculo... ad annos octo proxime venturos...”

[[23\]](#_ftnref23) Fereydoun Farrahi, Mohammad Malekahmadi, and Afshin Tajdini, “Serum Vitamin A Levels in Patients with Chalazion,” *Medical Hypothesis, Discovery and Innovation in Ophthalmology* 6, no. 3 (2017), pp. 63–6.

[[24\]](#_ftnref24) The Doria were an influential family in this region in which they owned castles and demenses, see Casimiro Turletti, *Storia di Savigliano corredata di documenti. Volume I* (Savigliano: Tipografia Bressa, 1879), p. 888.

[[25\]](#_ftnref25) See Figure 21 on page 131 and the accompanying description for details.

[[26\]](#_ftnref26) ASGe, Notai antichi 917, Giovanni Danove, filza 2, series I, nr. 341, dated 1468-05-06, where “Salvagina filia quondam Christofori de Auria et uxor primo loco quondam Petri Gentillis et nunc uxor Octi Piole de Saviliano sponte et ex certa scientia locavit et titulo locacionis dedit et concessit Raynaldo Gentilli de Bartholomei... quandam ipsius Salvagine sclavam nomine Mariam etatis annorum triginta trium in circa de progenie Zichorum... ad annos duoecim proxime venturos... et in fine dicti temporis dictorum annorum duodecim illam [Mariam] dimittere et relaxare dicte Salvagine in pace et sine aliqua molestia...”

[[27\]](#_ftnref27) Krueger and Mommsen, eds., *Corpus juris civilis*, digesta XXI.I.14, p. 271: “si mulier praegnas venierit, inter omnes convenit sanam eam esse...”

[[28\]](#_ftnref28) Domenico Gioffrè, *Il mercato degli schiavi a Genova nel secolo XV* (Genova: Fratelli Bozzi, 1971), p. 127.

[[29\]](#_ftnref29) See Chapter 7 for a detailed analysis of life insurance contracts on enslaved pregnant women.

[[30\]](#_ftnref30) David Brion Davis, *The Problem of Slavery in Western Culture* (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1988), p. 38. The revival of Roman law in the thirteenth century also resulted in the revival of the notion that the inherent freedom or unfreedom of a person was a status inherited from the mother. This concept would later be adopted into the common law of the American colonies during the seventeenth century, eventually becoming the legal doctrine of “partus sequitur ventrem.” The uniformity of this notion has been contested by Sally McKee, who notes that in many locales the status of a child was based upon on the status of the father. In fifteenth century Florence, for example, the children of a free man and an enslaved woman were legally free persons. See Sally McKee, “Inherited Status and Slavery in Late Medieval Italy and Venetian Crete,” *Past and Present* 182 (2004), p. 45. The situation was not the same in Genoa, as she correctly notes.

[[31\]](#_ftnref31) David Herlihy and Christiane Klapisch-Zuber, *Tuscans and Their Families: A Study of the Florentine Catasto of 1427* (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1985), p. 145.

[[32\]](#_ftnref32) There needs to be more study on this phenomenon for the late medieval and early modern Mediterranean.

[[33\]](#_ftnref33) ASGe, Notai antichi 418, Cristoforo de Revellino, register 6, 1392, fol. 1r–v, entry dated 1392-01-02, where “Antonius de Casteliono notarius... vendidit et titulo venditionis dedit et traddidit Margarine uxori Oddoni Galaffii de Sancto Romulbo speciarii... quamdam ipsius sclavam de progenie Tartarorum vocatam Margaritam etatis annorum decem et octo vel circha sanum et nitidam de persona usque diem et horam presentem ab omnibus viciis et magagnis ocultis et manifestis, excepto vicii pregnacionis... de acordio deliberavunt et inter eas firmaverant quod in quantum dicta Margherita esset pregnans non repataretur pro vicio vel magagna, imo in quantum est pregnans dicta sclavam habeatur pro vendita, et sit periculo et fortuna dicte Margarite...”

[[34\]](#_ftnref34) ASGe, Notai antichi 482, Giuliano Canella, register 5, 1415–1417, fol. 24r–v, entry dated 1415-10-19, where “Matheus de Oliva notarius civis Ianue vendidit et vendicionis titulo dedit et traddidit Cosme de Lazarino civi Ianue quondam Antonii... sclavam unam ipsius Mathei de progenie Tartarorum nominatum Magdalenam nunc gravida etatis annorum XXtiocto vel circa sanam usque hodie... per pactum... de et pro gravidicione et partu… dicte sclave nascitur ex dicte sclava et occaxione dicte gravidicionis omne risicum et damnum sit et esse debeat super dictum emptorem per dictam vendicionem...”

[[35\]](#_ftnref35) ASGe, Notai antichi 720, Bartolomeo Risso, filza 6, nr. 319, dated 1455-11-08, where “Antonio Pinelus civis Ianue tanquam procurator et procuratorio nomine Antonioti Grilli civis Ianue quondam domini Ioannis... vendidit et titulo vendicionis dedit cessit tradidit et mandavit seu quasi Nicolao de Guizo civi Ianue quondam Nicolai... quandam sclavam ipsius Antonioti Grilli vocatam Magdalena ectatis annorum triginta unius in circa de progenie Rubeorum que dicitur esse gravida... quod in casa quo decideret de dicta gravidacione seu partu ad devicione eiusdem quod tunc et eo casu dictus Antonius dicto nomine teneatur dictas libras triginta unam Ianue reddere et restituere...”

[[36\]](#_ftnref36) For example, see Megan Wolff, “The Myth of the Actuary: Life Insurance and Frederick L. Hoffman’s *Race Traits and Tendencies of the American Negro*,” *Public Health Reports* 121, no. 1 (2006), pp. 84–91; Cheryl Rhan-Hsin Chen and Gary Simon, “Actuarial Issues in Insurance on Slaves in the United States South,” *The Journal of African American History* 89, no. 4 (2004), pp. 348–57.

[[37\]](#_ftnref37) The links between miscarriage and living conditions for enslaved women in the Americas are discused in Jennifer Morgan, *Laboring Women: Reproduction and Gender in New World Slavery* (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2004), pp. 111–2.

[[38\]](#_ftnref38) Indicated by the Latin ablative “excepto” + the genitive, that is, “with the exception of...” or “exceptis” + the genitive, that is, “with the exceptions of...”

[[39\]](#_ftnref39) ASGe, Notai antichi 914bis, Tommaso Duracino, filza 28, series I, nr. 261, dated 1490-12-16, where “Nicolaus de Garbarino notaio quondam Iohannis et Pelegrus de Mandelo quondam Iohannis cives Ianue nomine et vice Iacobinete filie quondam Iacopo de Oliva et uxor quondam Ieronimi de Garbarino vendiderunt... dederunt tradiderunt et consignaverunt Galeacio Pasque civi Ianue quondam Iuli... quandam sclavam dicte Iacobinete nominatam Melicha de progenie Bossinorum ectatis annorum decem et octo vel circa sanam et nitidam ab omnibus viciis et magagnis ocultis et manifestis secundum morem et consuetudinem civitatis Ianue exceptis a malo mestrui pertinet inteligatur comprehensis ymo exclusio a dictis viciis...”

[[40\]](#_ftnref40) ASGe, Notai antichi 720, Bartolomeo Risso, filza 6, nr. 345 (formerly nr. 346), dated 1456-04-09, where “Constantinus Ricius seaterius civis Ianue... vendidit et titulo vendicionis dedit tradidit et mandavit seu quasi cessit Benedicto Bogiolo mersario in Ianua quondam Iullius... quandam sclavam ipsius Constantini vocatam Margareta de progenie Zichorum ectatis annorum XXVIII in circa sanam et nitidam secundum consuetudinem civitatis Ianue excepto ab audita non tam bona et a certis dogiis aliquando habet in ventre...”

[[41\]](#_ftnref41) Erol Belgin and Gonca Sennaroglu, “Audiological findings in pregnancy,” *The Journal of Laryngology and Otology* 115, no. 8 (2001), pp. 617–21.

[[42\]](#_ftnref42) ASGe, Notai antichi 890, Tommaso Duracino, filza 3, series I, nr. 129, dated 1457-05-05, where “Petrus de Franciscis civis Ianue quondam Rebelle... vendidit et titulo et ex causa vendicionis dedit cessit tradidit et consignavit domino magistro Baptiste de Bonniventus civis Ianue medicine doctori quondam Octivi... quandam sclavam dictam Petri nominatam Nestaxia de progenie Zichorum ectatis annorum viginti duorm vel circa sanam et nitidam ab omnibus viciis et magagnis ocultis et manifestus secundum morem et consietudinem civitatem Ianue et specialiter a mestruis suis ita et taliter quo dicta Nestaxia perseverabit ordinate in dictis mestruis suis per annum unum et diem proxime venturos...”

[[43\]](#_ftnref43) The implication of “what the enslaved must not wear” is that the enslaved had been wearing these clothes and this act was interpreted by the state as a form of social transgression.

[[44\]](#_ftnref44) Leon Battista Alberti, *The Family in Renaissance Florence*, trans. Renée Neu Watkins (Columbia: University of South Carolina Press, 1969), p. 195.

[[45\]](#_ftnref45) Carole Frick, *Dressing Renaissance Florence: Families, Fortunes, and Fine Clothing* (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2002), p. 92.

[[46\]](#_ftnref46) Benozzo Gozzoli, “The Vintage and Drunkenness of Noah” excerpt from fresco, middle of fifteenth century, Pisa, Campo Santo.

[[47\]](#_ftnref47) ASGe, Notai antichi 908, Tommaso Duracino, filza 21, nr. 246, dated 1478-05-04, sale by “Baptista de Costa civis Ianue quondam Bartholomei vendidit et titulo vendicionis dedit et consignavit nobili Stephano Spinule civi Ianue quondam Lanfranchi... quandam sclavam dicte Baptiste nominatam Caterina de progenie Zichorum ectatis annorum viginti novem vel circa sanam et nitidam ab omnibus viciis et magagnis ocultis et manifestis secundum morem et constetudinem civis Ianue cum omnibus raubis et vestibus dicte Caterine quas dictus Baptista dare et consignare teneatur et sic promisit dicto Stephano...”

[[48\]](#_ftnref48) ASGe, Notai antichi 644, Bartolomeo Senarega, filza 1, nr. 168, dated 1429-05-19, where “Antonius de Pastino quondam Manuelis civis Ianue titulo venditionis dedit et tradidit seu quasi presbitero Luciano de Massa presenti et ementi quamdam sclavam dicti Antonii nomine Magdalenam etatis annorum XVIII in circha de progenie Rubeorum talem qualem est et cum vestibus suis tales quales sunt...”

[[49\]](#_ftnref49) ASGe, Notai antichi 896, Tommaso Duracino, filza 9, nr. 402, dated 1466-07-29, where “Baptista Prianus quondam Benedicti suo proprio nomine et tamquam frater et coniuncta persona ac procurator cum balia ad instrumentum et alia Franchi Priani fratris sui... vendidit et titulo et ex causa vendicionis dedit cessit tradidit et consignavit et mandavit seu quasi Iacopo de Plebe Thomi... sclavam nominatam Margarita de progenie Rubeorum ectatis annorum viginti duorum vel circa cum illis raubis dicti Margariti que fuerent eisdem Baptiste et Francho traddite et consignati per Stefanum de Baxadonis quondam Iohanis a quo ipsis fratris... ut dicite apperi apodixe scripta manu Bartholomei de Culiano censarii et etiam fit mentio in quodam instrumento scripto manu Quilico de Serravali notario...”

[[50\]](#_ftnref50) ASGe, Notai antichi 770, Battista Parisola, filza 4, nr. 382, dated 1467-05-21, where “Bartholomeus Corsus barberius quondam Simonis vendidit et titulo et ex causa venditionis dedit cessit tradidit mandavit et consignavit Matheo de Lernia iuponerio quondam Beltrami... quamdam sclavam ipsius Bartholomei vocatam Mariam etatis annorum viginti octo in circa de progenie Rubeorum cum omnibus suis raubis et vestibus valoris et extimationis librarum triginta ianuinorum...” The enslaved Maria was sold with her clothes for a total price of 165 Genoese lire.

[[51\]](#_ftnref51) Victor Gay and Henri Stein, *Glossaire archéologique du Moyen Age et de la Renaissance. Volume I* (Paris: Librairie de la société bibliographique, 1887), p. 659. The nineteenth-century historian Girolamo Gargiolli speculates that the name *schiavine* might have indicated that these cloaks were made by enslaved persons in Cyprus and Soria (in Castile), see his *Il parlare degli artigiani di Firenze: dialoghi ed altri scritti* (Firenze: Giulio Cesare Sansoni, 1876), p. 71.

[[52\]](#_ftnref52) Pero Tafur, *Travels and Adventures, 1435–1439*, ed. and trans. Malcolm Letts (London: Routledge, 1926), p. 133.

[[53\]](#_ftnref53) Thorstein Veblen, *The Theory of the Leisure Class* (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2007), pp. 55–6.

[[54\]](#_ftnref54) Steven Epstein, *Speaking of Slavery: Color, Ethnicity, and Human Bondage in Italy* (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 2001), pp. 167–7. The lack of economic incentives for holding enslaved persons in comparison to hiring the poor as wage labourers was the reason behind Eric Williams provocative observation that the abolitionist movement in nineteenth century England was motivated more by economic concerns than moral concerns. See his *Capitalism and Slavery* (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1944), pp. 34–5, 179–96. This interpretation has been vigorously contested by Seymour Drescher, see his *Econocide: British Slavery in the Era of Abolition* (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2010), *passim*, who suggests that slavery remained a profitable enterprise and there were indeed moral concerns behind abolition. The extended debate between the adherents of Williams and Drescher continues to this day and is beyond the scope of this study. See Selwyn Carrington, “Econocide—Myth or Reality?—The Question of West Indian Decline, 1783–1806,” *Boletín de Estudios Latinoamericanos y del Caribe* 36 (1984), pp. 13–48; Seymour Drescher, “Econocide, Capitalism and Slavery: A Commentary,” *Boletín de Estudios Latinoamericanos y del Caribe*, (1984), pp. 49–65; Thomas Holt, “Explaining abolition,” *Journal of Social History* 24 (1990), pp. 371–8.

[[55\]](#_ftnref55) See the section beginning of page 81 for the detailed analysis of this phenomenon.

[[56\]](#_ftnref56) Jacques Heers, *Esclaves et domestiques au Moyen Âge dans le monde méditerranéen* (Paris: Arthème Fayard, 1981), p. 192.

[[57\]](#_ftnref57) Jacques Heers, *Gênes au XVe siècle. Activités économiques et problèmes sociaux* (Paris: S.E.V.P.E.N., 1961), pp. 65–6.

[[58\]](#_ftnref58) ASGe, Archivio segreto 543, Diversorum cancellarie 1449, entry dated 1449-03-07.

[[59\]](#_ftnref59) Emilio Pandiani, *Vita privata genovese nel Rinascimento* (Genova: Società ligure di storia patria, 1915), p. 210. Unfortunately he does not provide a reference to the source material.

[[60\]](#_ftnref60) Busalla was a commune approximately 30 km north of Genoa which was a feudal domain of the Spinola family and nominally part of the Republic of Genoa from the thirteenth century. The fifteenth century Florentine merchant Giovanni Ridolfi described the commune as an important entry point from the north into the Polcevera valley that led into the city of Genoa. See his “Viaggi di Giovanni Ridolfi fiorentino,” *Zibaldone* 1 (1889), pp. 53–4.

[[61\]](#_ftnref61) ASGe, Notai antichi 674,Cristoforo de Rapallo, filza 4, nr. 479, dated 1446-07-23, where “Bernabas Toiavacha de Buzala quondam Georgii pensionavit et locavit Nicolao Muso civi Saone quondam Manezardi... quandam servam ipsius Bernavobis nomine Maria de progenie Rubeorum etatis annorum XXXV vel circa... ad annos septem cum dimidio proxime venturos... promittens dictus Nicolaus dictam Mariam vestire et calciare pascere et gubernare sanam et infirmam durante dicto tempore cui voluerit...”

[[62\]](#_ftnref62) ASGe, Notai antichi 508, Branca Bagnara, register 3, 1426–1428, fol. 95r–v, entry dated 1427-04-08, where “Batista de Benisia civis Ianue locavit et titulo locacionis dedit et concessit Lodisio Dalfino quondam Nicolai accimatori in Ianue... quandam sclavam ipsius Batiste vocatam Divisia de progenie Zichorum etatis annorum viginti duorum vel circa... ad annos sex proxime venturos inceptos die prima aprilis mensis presentis...et dictus Lodisius... ipsam quem sclavam per totum dictum tempus alere gubernare vestire et calciare more famule...”

[[63\]](#_ftnref63) ASGe, Notai antichi 888, Tommaso Duracino, filza 1, series I, nr. 66, dated 1453-06-09, where “Nicolinus Montanaris tabernarius civis Ianue quondam Ardisoni locavit et titulo locacionis concessit et concedit Baptiste de Costa filio Bartholomei... quandam sclavam ipsius Nicolini nominatam Maria de progenie Rubeorum ectatis annorum triginta quinque in circa... ad annos quinque proxime venturos... dictus Nicolinus teneatur et debeat traddere et consignare ipsi Marie omnes et singulas suas raubas et vestimenta quas et que habet et tenet pro dolso et usu ipsius Marie tantum...”

[[64\]](#_ftnref64) ASGe, Notai antichi 891, Tommaso Duracino, filza 4, nr. 416, dated 1459-08-06, where “Ieronimus Calvus draperius civis Ianue quondam Iacobi... locavit et titulo locationis concessit et concedit Paulo de Promentorio civi Ianue quondam Bartholomei... quandam sclavam dicti Ieronimi nominatam Caterina de progenie Rubeorum ectatis annorum decem octo vel circa... ad annos duos proxime venturos...”

[[65\]](#_ftnref65) ASGe, Notai antichi 903, Tommaso Duracino, filza 16, nr. 536, dated 1473-06-16, where “Melchion de Monleone civis Ianue quondam Blasii locavit et titulo locacionis concessit et concedit Bartholomeo et Petro Iohanni Orabonis fratribus quondam Guirardi... nomine et vice Petri Oraboni fratris eorum... quandam sclavam dicti Melchionis nominatam Maria de progenie Rubeorum ectatis annorum quindecim vel circa... ad annos quatuor proxime venturos inceptos usque die prima mensis maii anni presentis... Bartholomeus et Petrus Iohannes accpetantes... pascere et calciare [Mariam] tum sanam quam infirmam durante dicto tempore dictorum annorum quatuor...” Pietro was absent at the enacted and represented by his brothers Bartolomeo and Pietro Giovanni, both of whom served as procurators.

[[66\]](#_ftnref66) John Pryor in Giraud Amalric, *Business Contracts of Medieval Provence: Selected Notulae from the Cartulary of Giraud Amalric of Marseilles* (Toronto: Pontifical Institute of Mediaeval Studies, 1981), pp. 25–6. Pryor notes that economic historians in particular have been guilty in assuming that slight differences in notarial language were of no historical importance.

[[67\]](#_ftnref67) ASGe, Notai antichi 917, Giovanni Danove, filza 2, series I, nr. 265, dated 1467-11-16, where the “vir nobilis Paulus de Auria quondam Ceve civis Ianue locavit et titulo locacionis dedit et concessit Laurentio Cataneo... quendam sclavum ipsius Pauli nomine Georgini de progenie [blank] etatis annorum decemocto in circa... ad annos duos... dictus Laurentius non teneatur nec obligatus sit quicquid expendere pro suo vestite...”

[[68\]](#_ftnref68) See the discussion beginning on page 364 for a summary of the status of enslaved women and their children.

[[69\]](#_ftnref69) Ibid.

[[70\]](#_ftnref70) Luigi Tommaso Belgrano, Cornelio Desimoni, and Vittorio Poggi, eds., *Leges genuenses* (Torino: Officium Regia, 1901), cols. 951–2, where “Si quis liber servam seu sclavam alicuius carnaliter cognoverit, que ex eo conceperit, teneatur dare et solvere domino vel domine serve libras viginti quinque Ianuinorum; si vero dicta sciava ex dicta impregnatione vel partu decesserit, dare teneatur et debeat domino vel domine dicte serve libras viginti quinque, teneatur autem dominus vel domina dicte sclave et debeat dare et tradere partum dicte sclave patri dicti partus, et dictus talis pater teneatur et debeat dictum talem partum recipere et dare et solvere domino vel domine supradicte sclave penam supradictam...”

[[71\]](#_ftnref71) ASGe, Notai antichi 724, Oberto Foglietta, filza 4, series II, nr. 292, dated 1456-09-06; see description in Laura Balletto, “Stranieri e forestieri a Genova: schiavi e manomessi (secolo XV),” in *Forestieri e stranieri nelle città basso-medievali* (Firenze: Salimbeni, 1988), p. 276. I was unable to find the sentence of the *sindicatores* during my time in the archive.

[[72\]](#_ftnref72) ASGe, Notai antichi 888, Tommaso Duracino, filza 1, series I, nr. 108, dated 1453-08-08, where “Petrus Grillus de Vulturo quondam Bonifacii... vendidit et titulo et ex causa vendicionis dedit cessit et tradidit et consignavit Gabrieli de Corvaria botario in Ianua quondam Antonii... quendam sclavum ipsius Petri nominatum Iacbonus de progenie Iharchasiorum sive cuiusvis alterius progeniei existat ectatis annorum triginta otto in circa... ad habendum tenendum gaudendum possidendum et usufructuandum et vendendum et aliendum et de dicto sclavo perpetuo faciendum quicquid et prout eidem Gabrieli et dictis heredibus suis de cetero placuerit faciendum tanquam de re propria et titulo vendicionis ut supra...”

[[73\]](#_ftnref73) Tria, *La schiavitù in Liguria*, pp. 83–7 delineates the variations on this statement in various sales contracts.

[[74\]](#_ftnref74) Steven Epstein, “A late medieval lawyer confronts slavery: the cases of Bartolomeo de Bosco,” *Slavery and Abolition* 20, no. 3 (1999), pp. 58–9; Id., *Speaking of Slavery*, p. 83. On the works of Bartolomeo in general, see Vito Piergiovanni, “Diritto e giustizia mercantile a Genova nel XV secolo: I *consilia* di Bartolomeo Bosco,” in *Consilia im späten Mittelalter: zum historischen Aussagewert einer Quellengattung*, ed. Ingrid Baumgärtner (Sigmaringen: Thorbecke, 1995), pp. 65–78.

[[75\]](#_ftnref75) Bartolomeo de Bosco, *Consilia egregii domini Bartholomei de Bosco famosissimi iuris consulti genuensis* (Loano: Franciscum Castellum, 1620), consilium 492, p. 788: “...negatur quod Pasqualinus in eadem consuetudine usque ad mortem suam permanserit: nam constat, quod eam non tenuit, nec ei cohabitauit, nec eam voluit tractari in domo, ut concubinam, sed ut sclavam, et more sclavarum, quia semper tanquam sclava feruiuit Niccolao Ratono, et omnibus, quibus Nicolaus voluit, et presentialiter feruit Ioanni Basadone, e familie suae...”

[[76\]](#_ftnref76) ASGe, Notai antichi 627, Niccolò Garumbero, filza 1, series III, item dated 1432-11-21. The enslaved Calì was leased for four years at the price of 35 Genoese lire. See Gioffrè, *Il mercato degli schiavi a Genova nel secolo XV*, p. 264 for a brief description.

[[77\]](#_ftnref77) ASGe, Notai antichi 907, Tommaso Duracino, filza 20, nr. 672, dated 1477-12-10. See note 13 on page 265 in this chapter for additional details on this contract.

[[78\]](#_ftnref78) ASGe, Notai antichi 895, Tommaso Duracino, filza 8, nr. 445, dated 1465-08-14, where “Domenicus Pilavicinus civis Ianue quondam Christofori... vendidit et titulo et ex causa vendicionis dedit et consignavit Salcerano de Adret de Falceto mercatori Catalano Ianue commonranti... quandam sclavam dicti Domenici nominatam Margarita de progenie Burgarorum sive cuiusvis alterius progenie existat ectatis annorum viginti quinque vel circa...” with the “ad habendum...” rights clause in a different hand. The use of apprentices in crafting the *note* versions of notarial contracts is very common. There are several acts where only the introductory protocol and the concluding *eschatocol* are in the hands of the notary, with the remainder recorded by the apprentice.

[[79\]](#_ftnref79) ASGe, Notai antichi 990, Lorenzo Costa, filza 4, nr. 880, dated 1471-11-11, where “Venerabiles sororer Brigida et Baptistina de Spinulis moniales in monasterio monialium sancte Barnabe extra muros civitatis Ianue, et ad cautelam in presentia cum consensuamentu et voluntate infrascriptarum dominarum, abbatisse et monialium dicti monasterii... vendiderunt et titulo et ex causa venditionis dederunt cesserunt traddiderunt et mandaverunt seu quasi Stephano de Clavaro filio Leonis... quamdam ipsarum sororum Brigide et Baptistine sclavam vocatam Ellenam etatis annorun triginta trium in circa de progenie Ungarorum ut asserit...” with the clause “ad habendum tenendum gaudendum possidendum et usufructuandum dictam sclavam de eaque titulo presentis venditionis de cetero faciendum et disponendo prout voluerit…”; see doc. 70 in Tria, *La schiavitù in Liguria*, pp. 201–3.

[[80\]](#_ftnref80) ASGe, Notai antichi 770, Battista Parisola, filza 4, nr. 382, dated 1467-05-21, with the condition that “acto... pacto expresso solemniter valato quod dictus Matheus non possit nec si liceat dictam sclavam vendere alienare, vel aliquo quovis titulo seu modo mittere extra Ianuam sine expressa licentia dicti Bartholomei venditoris”, see note 50 on page 275 of this chapter for additional details on this contract.

[[81\]](#_ftnref81) ASGe, Notai antichi 1122, Girolamo Loggia, filza 2, series II, nr. 275, dated 1483-05-10, where “Paulus Boisardus quondam Pauli.. vendidit Iacopo de Nigro quondam Iohannis... quandam sclavam nomine Caterinam de progenie [blank space] etatis annorum viginti octo in circa... per pactum expressum inter dicatas partes quad dictus Iacobous non possit nec si liceat tenere dicatm Caterinam in civitate Ianue nec in suburbiis et seu villis circumstantibus nisi de voluntate Francisci Lomellini quondam Antonii...”

[[82\]](#_ftnref82) ASGe, Notai antichi 312, Andreolo Caito, register 4, 1392–1393, fol. 11v, entry dated 1393-01-07, where “Bartholomeus remolarius de Vulturo loco et titulo locationis concedo tibi Iuliano de Turri civi Ianue filio emancipato ut asseris Raffaelis de Turri presenti... quedam sclavam seu servam meam vocatam Magdalena de progenie Zichorum etatis annorum viginti vel circa... ad annos tres tunc proxime venturos... quod durantibus dictis annis tribus dicta sclava per dictum Iulianum vel habentem causam ab eo non possit extrahi de Ianue et tribus potestariis Bisamnis Pulcifere et Vulturis...”

[[83\]](#_ftnref83) Sandro Antonini, *Adriano V dei Fieschi: il suo tempo, la vita, il borgo di Trigoso* (Foggia: Bastogi, 2002), p. 122.

[[84\]](#_ftnref84) Luciano Grossi Bianchi and Ennio Poleggi, *Una città portuale del medioevo: Genova nei secoli X–XVI* (Genova: SAGEP, 1987), p. 208.

[[85\]](#_ftnref85) ASGe, Notai antichi 595bis, Antonio de Fazio, filza 22, nr. 54, dated 1427-04-03, where “Petrus Facori civis Ianue... locavit et titulo locationis concessit magistro Thome de Roma magistro scholarum in Ianua... quandam sclavam vocatam Anna ettatis annorum viginti quinque in circa et que fuit serva quondam Antonii de Camilla pro alumna vel quocumque sit pro annis tribus et mense uno proxime venturos... magistri Thome eaque Annam calciare pascere et vestire in omnibus necessariis durante dicto tempore... quod dictus magister Thomas non possit habitari facere dictam Annam in contrata Schutarie vel illorum de Camilla et Lercariorumm durante dictore tempore... si dictus Petrus invenerit dictam Annam habitare in dicta contrata, quod ei liceat et ei licitum sit illam accipere libere absque condicione aliqua dicti magistri Thome vel alterius persone omni exceptione remota...”

[[86\]](#_ftnref86) ASCGe, Manoscritti 55, Delle nobili famiglie genovesi libro primo, fol. 73 which names “Antonio [Camilla] sindicatore 1416 anziano 1418...”; ASCGe, Manoscritti 440, fol. 140, which names “anno 1416... Antoniotto de Camilla… sindicatori...” and fol. 158 which names “anno 1418... Antonio de Camilla… nobilis… antiani...”; ASGe, Notai antichi 480, Giuliano Canella, register 3, 1412–1413, fol. 95r, entry dated 1412-03-09, for a voyage from Naples to Sluis (near Antwerp); see also María Teresa Ferrer i Mallol, “Dos registres de l’*Officium Maris* de Gènova (1402–1403, 1408–1410),” in *Atti del primo congresso storico Liguria-Catalogna* (Bordighera: Istituto internazionale di studi liguri, 1974), p. 32.

[[87\]](#_ftnref87) Epstein, *Speaking of Slavery*, pp. 83–4.

[[88\]](#_ftnref88) ASGe, Notai antichi 554, Giovanni Labaino, filza 7, series II, nr. 164, dated 1430-10-21, which names Francesco, Manfredo, Domenico, Giorgio, and Teodosio Camilla as the sons and elementary heirs of the deceased Antonio Camilla.

[[89\]](#_ftnref89) Julian Pitt-Rivers, “Honour and Social Status,” in *Honour and Shame: The Values of Mediterranean Society*, ed. John Péristiany (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1966), pp. 50–2.

[[90\]](#_ftnref90) Giachetto Malespini, Ricordano Malespini, and Giovanni di Pagolo Morelli, *Istoria fiorentina* (Firenze: Giovanni Gaetano Tartini e Santi Franchi, 1718), p. 241; see also Epstein, *Speaking of Slavery*, p. 24.

[[91\]](#_ftnref91) See the discussion and analysis on this theme beginning on page 311.

[[92\]](#_ftnref92) ASGe, Notai antichi 578, Antonio Fazio, filza 4, series I, nr. 302, dated 1435-09-17, where “Andreolus de Vivaldis civis Ianue dominus et patronus Catarine sclave sue de progenie Avogaxiorum etatis annorum viginti quinque in circa locavit et pensionavit Cosme Salvago civi Ianue quondam Stregini... dictam sclavam talem qualem est... pro annis tribus proxime venturis... ad omne periculum et rixicum ipsius Cosme tam mortis quam fughe et cuiuscumque alterius periculi respectu infrascripti salarii seu pensionis tantum et similiter ad rixicum et periculum lactis...”

[[93\]](#_ftnref93)ASGe, Notai antichi 893, Tommaso Duracino, filza 6, series I, nr. 198, dated 1461-05-28, where “Augustinus Botus speciarius civis Ianue Ieronimi maior annis viginti quinque... tam suo proprio et privato nomine quod nomine et vice Michaelis de Turrilia... locavit et titulo locacionis dedit et concessit Antonio de Furnariis de Viglevano Petri... quandam sclavam dicti Michaelis nominatam Magdalena de progenie Zichorum ettatis annorum vigintiquinque vel circa... ad annum unum proxime venturum...” Michele was absent at the enactment and was represented by the apothecary named Agostino Botto who acted as procurator.

[[94\]](#_ftnref94) ASGe, Notai antichi 892, Tommaso Duracino, filza 5, nr. 441 (formerly nr. 229), dated 1460-09-04, where “Michaele de Turrilia civis Ianue quondam Iohannis sponte et ex certa scientia confessus fuit et confitetur et in veritate publice recognovit et recognoscit Augustino Boto speciario civis Ianue Ieronimi... dictus Michael per se et heredes suos se obligando locavit et titulo locacionis concessit et concedit dicto Augustino quandam sclavam dicti Michaelis nominatam Magdalenam de progenie Zichorum ectatis annorum viginti quinque vel circa... ad annum unum proxime venturum...”

[[95\]](#_ftnref95) ASGe, Notai antichi 1121, Girolamo Loggia, filza 1, series I, nr. 273, dated 1473-10-09, where “Laurentius de Costa notarius tanquam procurator et procuratorio nomine Mariole filie quondam Iohannis Martini de Turrilia et uxoris quondam Bartholomei de Levanto notarii... locavit et titulo locationis dedit et concessit sub pactis et conditionibus infrascriptis nobili Despine filie quondam Aimoni Pinelli et olim uxori quondam Frederici Centurioni... quandam dicte Mariole sclavam nomine Magdalenam etatis annorum viginti octo in circa de progenie Zichorum... per annos duodecim proxime venturos... acto ut supra quod si durantibus dictis annis duodecim dicta Magdalena quoque modo decederet, quod intelligatur decessisse rixico et interesse dicte Despine et non in aliquo dicti Laurentii dicto nomine nec propterea teneatur dictus Laurentius dicto nomine nec obligatus sit ad restitutionem dictarum librarum centum quinquaginta nec alicuius partis earum...”