# Chapter 11 Enslaved persons in the home: enslaved women as household servants in the Genoese Mediterranean

The large numbers of enslaved household servants in the late medieval Genoese Mediterranean were reflected by the omnipresence of elite families in the market economy of slavery. These families were instrumental in financing this market and the enslaved women whom they exploited as household servants populated the network of extended family *castelli* scattered across the city of Genoa.[[1\]](#_ftn1) This chapter will begin with a brief look at the most active *nobiles* alberghi in the market economy of slavery. This will be followed by a look at the men and women from *artefices* families who also exploited the enslaved for household service. An extended analysis of one of the most common forms of household service by enslaved women—their exploitation as wet nurses—will illustrate the structure and prevalence of this phenomenon. The chapter will conclude by analyzing the insurance contracts for pregnant enslaved women working in the households of the *nobiles* and illustrating how women labouring in these household were often the victims of sexual exploitation by their holders but were also entered into sexual relationships with persons outside their household on their own accord.

## 11.1 Elite families and household service

The analysis of the social topography of slaveholding in Chapter 4 revealed the surprising observation that men and women from *populares* families (that is, the *mercantes* and *artefices* families) represented the greatest proportion slaveholders in sales and leasing contracts.[[2\]](#_ftn2) The *nobiles* alberghi figured far more prominently in the commercial and financial life of the Genoese Mediterranean and one might have expected to see their dominance in the historical record. It should be noted, however, that many of the larger *mercantes* families and alberghi—like the Giustiniani and the Sauli—were just as wealthy as their *nobiles* counterparts and just as active in Mediterranean commerce. Merchants from *nobiles* families were nevertheless disproportionately represented on a per capita basis in sales and leasing contracts for enslaved persons. They accounted for about forty-two percent of sellers, twenty-eight percent of buyers, forty percent of lenders, and thirty six percent of receivers in these contracts enacted during the years 1350 to 1528, despite constituting less than ten percent of the total population.[[3\]](#_ftn3)

The distribution of slaveholders from *nobiles* alberghi named in sales and leasing contracts is illustrated in Figures 55 and 56. These distributions confirm that the families most active in the commercial networks of the eastern Mediterranean slaving zones—the Cattaneo, the Lomellini, and the Spinola—were also the families most active in the local commerce of enslaved persons. The absolute magnitude of this commerce is undoubtedly related to the size of each albergo, but the relative participation per capita reveals an even stronger drive towards specialization by certain families. The appearance by merchants from the Lomellini and Doria alberghi in the sales contracts of enslaved persons, coupled with their relative demographic representation, for example, suggests that the Lomellini were about five time more active per capita than the Doria in the market economy of the enslaved.[[4\]](#_ftn4) Any speculation, furthermore, that certain families had moral concerns around enslavement based solely on these numbers should be avoided. It was far more likely, rather, that the dominance of smaller and medium-sized alberghi like the Cattaneo, the Salvago, and the Lomellini demonstrates that certain families had decided to strategically concentrate their local commercial activity into the slave trade.

[ image 701003A3.svg ]

Figure 56: Alberghi designated as *nobiles* in sales contracts for enslaved persons, 1348–1528. From the dataset of 632 sales contracts enacted in Genoa from 1348 to 1528.

[ image 702003A1.svg ]

Figure 57: Merchants from the noble *alberghi* named in leasing contracts for enslaved persons, 1370–1500. From the dataset of 257 leasing contracts recorded by Genoese notaries.

The participation of the most active families in sales contracts in Figure 56 was not proportional to their local population but rather to their degree of activity in overseas Mediterranean commerce. The distribution in Figure 57 diverges from this pattern. The imbalance between the participation of the Lomellini and Doria families seen in the distribution of sales contracts, for example, has largely disappeared, and their participation in leasing contracts is closer to their actual population distribution. The disproportionate participation of families such as the Camilla and the Cattaneo in sales contracts was also not similarly reflected in leasing contracts, where their numbers are instead more correspondent to their relatively low local populations. This divergence between sales and leasing by *nobiles* families supplements the earlier observations on the relatively low participation of foreign merchants in leasing contracts in Chapter 4: that the leasing of enslaved persons in late medieval Genoa was largely a local market phenomenon.

Enslaved persons held by members of *nobiles* families were almost always forced into household service. The contracts were generally silent about the type of work performed by enslaved persons, but it would have included duties such as washing, cleaning, cooking, and other forms of physical labour. The purchaser of an enslaved man or woman had dominion over the enslaved as an object of property which they could exploit in any way they pleased if the exploitation conformed to local statutory norms. It was not generally in the scope of sales contracts to specify details regarding the manner that the enslaved person as *res* could be used. It would be statutory law that instead delimited how an enslaved man or woman could be exploited by their holder. There would nevertheless be certain cases where contractual clauses served to supplement statutory law and placed further limits on the social life of the enslaved.[[5\]](#_ftn5)

Iris Origo has noted that enslaved persons purchased by *nobiles* families in Tuscany and other Italian polities were generally forced into household service and would have been considered a *famulus or famula* alongside the other household servants who were wage labourers. She notes that the physical abuse accorded to enslaved household servants and its customary and legal sanction was similar to the physical abuse accorded to wage labourers and family members themselves by the paterfamilias, which was also legally sanctioned.[[6\]](#_ftn6) The harsh treatment of the enslaved during the late medieval era did not thus necessarily indicate their exclusion as *famuli or famule*. The presence of enslaved women working household servants in elite families, rather than other forms of labour, is perhaps best reflected in the literature of the era. Mario Ferrara has examined the language of the enslaved in two Florentine sonnets of the fifteenth century. Both sonnets contained fictionalized characters who were women working as domestic servants and who complained about being forced to wash sheets, weave linen, and perform other heavy and menial tasks.[[7\]](#_ftn7) The early sixteenth century literary works of the Florentine playwright Giovan Maria Cecchi were likewise replete with characters of enslaved women working as household servants. His play *The Slave Girl* (published in 1531)—in which an enslaved household servant from Pera serves as the central character—takes place in the city of Genoa, both illustrating and further cementing the association between Genoa and slavery in the early modern Italian consciousness.[[8\]](#_ftn8)

There were some leasing contracts where the required form of household service was explicitly mentioned. In the spring of 1459, for example, an enslaved Circassian woman named Margarita entered the household of the nobleman Girolamo Doria. Margarita was to work as a household servant as well as a wet nurse for the Doria family for a term of two years.[[9\]](#_ftn9) In another example from winter of 1470 an enslaved Tatar woman named Melica entered the household of the noblewoman Maria Doria. Melica was to serve as a *famulus*, that is, a household servant, for the recently widowed Maria for a term of two years.[[10\]](#_ftn10) It is reasonable to assume that most enslaved women working in noble households would have been exploited in this manner even though most contracts that leased enslaved persons to elite households did not explicitly mention the obligation of household service. Maria was represented in the above transaction by her son Salvago Vivaldi, whom she had appointed as her procurator. Salvago might have wanted to ensure that Melica would concentrate her service on this recently widowed mother and not be exploited by other members of the extended albergo.

## 11.2 Artisan families and household service

The enslaved persons held by artisan families would be expected to provide service in both the home and the workshop. The analysis in Chapter 12 will consider the forms of workshop labour conducted by enslaved persons held by slaveholders from *artefices* families. In these situations, the enslaved would have primarily been exploited for workshop labour with the expectation of additional household labour as a required but secondary component. There was one exception to this trend: urban professionals in the market economy of slavery.

The slaveholders from the urban professional occupational category were the principal transactors in approximately twenty percent of all sales and leasing contracts involving persons from the *artefices* social category.[[11\]](#_ftn11) These urban professions included a few medical doctors and grammar teachers. In the late summer of 1474, an enslaved Muslim named Caterina held by the notary Andreolo de Caito was sold to the medical doctor Battista Bonivento.[[12\]](#_ftn12) In another example from the winter of 1446, an enslaved Russian woman named Cita who has held by the grammar teachers Antonio and Francesco de Dallo was sold to the Florentine merchant Matteo de Ser Antonio.[[13\]](#_ftn13) There are several important facets to this sale. First, Francesco represented the absent Antonio as his procurator by the power of a contract enacted the previous year by the notary Antonio de Ferrari, for which an extracted copy was presented during the sale. Second, the enacting notary Tommaso Duracino served as the procurator for the absent Matteo, who was conducting business in Mallorca at that time. Third, the contract appears to represent the formalization of the earlier exchange of Cita between the two grammar teachers and the Florentine merchant which had been conducted about one year previous, perhaps in Mallorca, Florence, or some other foreign locale.[[14\]](#_ftn14) The enslaved Caterina had been in Florence for quite some time before the contract was enacted. 

Most urban professionals who participated in this aspect of the market economy of slavery were notaries. The notarial profession in late medieval Genoa was dominated by men from *artefices* families, although a few persons from *mercantes* families also practiced the craft. It was completely dominated, therefore, by men from *populares* families: there were no persons from the *nobiles* in the notarial college during the period of this study. In contrast, however, the men from *nobiles* families constituted nearly the entirety of men who practiced as lawyers. The two primary legal professions were thus bifurcated according to social category in late medieval Genoa. Approximately half of those practicing the notarial profession in Genoa at the end of the fourteenth century also served in influential governmental offices—as ambassadors, managers of various offices, in the chancery, in the Casa di San Giorgio—where their literacy and legal expertise were used in salaried positions that served to supplement their private income as notaries. By the year 1413 all positions in the chancery of the republic were mandated as reserved for members of the notarial guild and by the year 1447 all administrative positions in the civil service were also mandated to be filled by notaries.[[15\]](#_ftn15) These were very well-paid positions. The notary and humanist Giorgio Stella, for example, was paid 100 Genoese lire for his year working as a scribe for the *Massaria generalis communis Ianue* during the period 1412–13, and likewise the notary and humanist Antonio Gallo was paid 200 Genoese lire per year in his role as chancellor of the Casa di San Giorgio in the later fifteenth century.[[16\]](#_ftn16) These were considerable sums for individuals from *artefices* families, particularly when considering that these salaries could be supplemented with parallel governmental appointments and private notarial work. Practicing notaries were, therefore, among the wealthiest and most influential artisans in late medieval Genoa, and in an economic sense, it might be said that they were *artefices* in name only.

There nevertheless remained a large divide between notaries and persons who belonged to *nobiles* families with regards to overall wealth, political influence, and commercial activity. Benjamin Kedar has asserted that the direct participation of notaries in Mediterranean commerce was “rather slight and casual”, despite their role in drafting the legal and commercial documents that buttressed this activity.[[17\]](#_ftn17) Their roles as the ‘brokers of public trust’ in the drafting of numerous and often complex commercial agreements, furthermore, gave them a crucial insight into the items of commerce and their value. In particular, the high monetary value ascribed to enslaved persons ensured that their commercial exchange continued to be recorded in notarial contracts well into the early modern era. As an occupational group with rapidly expanding social mobility brought on by the increased demand for literate bureaucrats, coupled with their exposure to the enslaved in the rapidly expanding market economy of slavery, notaries began to vigorously participate in this economy during the fifteenth century. They not only bought and sold enslaved persons to accumulate financial capital for themselves, but they also purchased and held enslaved women to serve as household servants and outwardly reflect their newfound social mobility.

Most notaries who were named as slaveholders were also among those who served major roles in the administration of the republic. In the summer of 1465, an enslaved woman named Cita was sold by the nobleman Guglielmo Embriaco to the notary Niccolò Credenza.[[18\]](#_ftn18) Niccolò served as one of the two chancellors of Genoa from 1443 to 1477, working alongside the humanist Giacomo Bracelli most of this time. He also served on the *Officium monete*, the office that managed the finances of the republic and often functioned as the intermediary body between the state and the Casa di San Giorgio. He seemed to be one of those notaries who completely devoted himself to public administration—and the secure salary it provided—and largely eschewed private affairs.[[19\]](#_ftn19) In his diplomatic letters he often referred to himself as “Niccolò de Credenza, public notary by authority of the empire, and most esteemed chancellor of the commune of Genoa,” a rather pretentious title reflecting an exaggerated sense of self-importance that emerged from his extended contact with the entitled ruling classes.[[20\]](#_ftn20) He must have nevertheless been a careful and skilled diplomat, having had to negotiate the turbulent political vicissitudes during the periods of French and Milanese submission, not to mention the factionalism endemic whenever the Genoese decided to govern themselves. It should also be noted that his father Tommaso, his grandfather Antonio, and his great-grandfather Corrado were also notaries that served as chancellors, illustrating the nepotism that was—and remains—an inevitable part of lucrative public offices.[[21\]](#_ftn21) These descendants of Niccolò were also slaveholders. In the spring of 1378, for example, an enslaved Tatar woman was purchased by his grandfather Antonio de Credenza from the widowed Benvegnuda Villar, who the spouse of the deceased Pedro Villar, a merchant from Barcelona.[[22\]](#_ftn22) The purchase of Cita would represent an important part of the self-fashioning of Niccolò de Credenza as an elite member of Genoese society by carrying on the tradition of his ancestors as slaveholders.

There were also many notaries who sold and leased enslaved persons in the market economy of slavery. Although sales contracts are silent on how the notaries came into possession of these enslaved persons, there were a few noticeable differences between the patterns of buying and selling. First, in every contract where a notary was specified as the buyer, the enslaved person was a woman. There were no purchased of enslaved men by notaries, which makes sense given that these women were most likely destined for household service. Secondly, in contrast, almost one-third of enslaved persons sold by notaries were men. Almost half of enslaved persons sold in these contracts were also under the age of eighteen. Both patterns represent a departure from the norm and suggest that many of enslaved persons sold by notaries might have been the offspring of enslaved women that they held. A variation of this interpretation has also been suggested by Giovanna Petti Balbi, who noted that fifteenth-century Genoese notaries were fathers to a disproportionate number of illegitimate children. She concluded that these children were probably born to enslaved women being held by the notaries.[[23\]](#_ftn23)

## 11.3 Slavery and wet nursing

Poor and enslaved women often served as wet nurses in the households of urban elites across the Mediterranean basin during the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries. The seminal study of Christiane Klapisch-Zuber demonstrated the omnipresence of extra-familial wet nurses in elite Florentine families from the fourteenth to sixteenth century.[[24\]](#_ftn24) Similar studies for other Mediterranean regions have followed. Debra Blumenthal has examined the testimony of extra-familial wet nurses in fifteenth century Valencia to elucidate the kinship bonds that were formed and strengthened between these nurses and the families who employed them.[[25\]](#_ftn25) Rebecca Winer has similarly examined employment contracts enacted between wet nurses and the families who employed them in late medieval Barcelona, noting the dominance of elite families in this endeavour as well as the wage disparity between nursing servants and regular household servants.[[26\]](#_ftn26) These studies span different geographical and jurisdictional regions but have one common thread: they all make note of the contradiction between the prevalence of extra-familial wet nursing and the moral prescriptions of clerics and humanists against the practice. The primary focus of these studies, furthermore, has been the hiring of poor women to serve as wet nurses with only a marginal discussion of using enslaved women for this purpose.[[27\]](#_ftn27)

In the *Libri della famiglia* (published ca. 1432) the Florentine humanist Leone Battista Alberti suggested that families—and here he meant elite merchant families—should avoid the use of servants and poor women as wet nurses and advocated that women should instead nurse their own children. He referenced a broad range of medieval and classical literature to make the dubious claim that both physical and moral illnesses would be passed on from the nurse to the nursling. The implication was that servants and the poor would be more susceptible to physical disease due to lifestyle and that their social station was primarily the result of their lack of moral character. Alberti alluded, furthermore, that the time and effort required to procure a nurse of suitable moral and physical character was an inherently economically inefficient activity and any perceived economic advantages of hiring extra-familial wet nurses would be illusory at best.[[28\]](#_ftn28) These notions about proper nursing were also influenced by (and would influence) several fifteenth century humanist treatises. In the *De re uxoria* (published *circa* 1416), the Venetian humanist Francesco Barbaro would also strongly urge elite women to nurse their own children, and in cases where they were unable to do so, then they should “place them with good nurses, not with slaves, strangers, or drunken or unchaste women... [and] give their infants to the care to those who are freeborn.”[[29\]](#_ftn29) This advice was largely ignored by the Genoese and other Italian elites—like similar late medieval proscriptions against usury—who implicitly prioritized the preservation of socioeconomic capital over moral capital by continuing to use servants and enslaved women as wet nurses. The economic actors from elite families—who were always cognizant to accumulate financial capital for their respective alberghi—would certainly have not assigned much value to statements like “the accumulation of money for the family is really worth nothing,” even with the backing of ancient literary authorities.[[30\]](#_ftn30) The fifteenth-century proliferation of leasing contracts for enslaved pregnant women to work as wet nurses, furthermore, provided slaveholders yet another means by which Genoese merchants extracted financial capital from the bodies of the enslaved.

These contracts for leasing enslaved women for the purpose of wet nursing are again reflective of the view of the slaveholders and not the enslaved women who were the objects of these contracts. The analysis of these terse contracts, however, can offer insights into the roles that these enslaved women were forced to perform. The contracts for leasing enslaved women for the purpose of wet nursing were generally enacted for relatively short terms, with the most common term being three years. The quick return of the enslaved woman from her service as a wet nurse also prevented the consolidation of any strong kinship ties between the nurse and the child of the receiver, which would have been a constant concern of the parents of the nursling. The contractual conditions also allowed the lender of the enslaved woman to maximize his or her profit for the lease by ensuring that she would be returned their household in a timely manner. These short terms therefore served the interests of the slaveholders to the detriment of the enslaved woman. The contracts were generally enacted under the condition that the woman being leased was *cum lacte*—meaning that she recently given birth and could be exploited as a wet nurse—or some similar qualification.[[31\]](#_ftn31) Figure 58 illustrates the distribution of terms in leasing contracts where the woman was obligated to serve as a wet nurse.

This system of exploitation could—and very often did—result in enslaved women being leased out multiple times during their twenties and thirties. This would have caused considerable disruption in the social lives of younger enslaved women: the constant movement between households would have made it exceedingly difficult to consolidate long-term kinship and community ties. This system of exploitation also allowed slaveholders to continuously accumulate financial capital on the labour of the enslaved woman, who not only had to bear the burden of being transferred from household to household, but in some cases the burden of having to nurse other children while she was nursing her own, although in many situations the child of an enslaved woman would have been abandoned to a foundling home.[[32\]](#_ftn32) It would generally have been expected, furthermore, that the enslaved woman would have also performed household service and other forms of manual labour for the receiver in addition to nursing, which would have created additional pressures on her health and wellbeing.

[ image 702006A1.svg ]

Figure 58: Term of lease (in years) for women named in leasing contracts for the enslaved for the purpose of wet nursing. From the subset of 34 leasing contracts enacted from 1371 to 1476.

There were also certain variations on this form of fixed term lease. In the winter of 1416, for example, an enslaved woman named Maria who was held by a certain Raffaele de Spezia was leased out to the merchant Egidio Merello. Raffale received a payment of 30 Genoese soldi per month—equivalent to a yearly payment of 9 Genoese lire—with no specified term or end date. The enslaved Maria was obligated to serve as a wet nurse for the family of Egidio for an indefinite amount of time. The contract also contained an option that allowed Egidio to terminate the lease at the end of each month.[[33\]](#_ftn33) An annotation in the margin by the notary Giuliano Canella indicated that Egidio kept Maria for about seven months, and that she returned to the household of Raffaele on the fourth of August of the same year. This was technically a fixed term lease with an option to renew at the end of each month, although it seems that both parties treated it as a form of floating term lease, with Egidio not so much renewing the lease monthly but electing when to terminate the lease. The uncertainty of the term of service may have represented an additional source of unease for Maria who would be unable to anticipate when she might be returned to her previous household. In another example from the summer of 1460, an enslaved Tatar woman named Lucia entered the household of the silk worker Giovanni de Sancto Salvatore to serve as a wet nurse for his family a term of one year. The term could be extended for an additional two years should Giovanni desire. If Lucia should, however, become pregnant during the duration of the contract, then the term could only be extended for an additional year instead of two.[[34\]](#_ftn34) The notary was yet again silent about the rationale behind this option. It might have been the case that the lender Margarita Sacherio was worried that Lucia would be unable to sufficiently nurse two of her own infants as well as the child of Giovanni. This might superficially seem like concern for the health and wellbeing of Lucia, but it is also worth remembering that her children were also legally the property of Margarita and, as such, the slaveholder wanted to ensure their continued good health for economic reasons.

Enslaved women who were forced into service as wet nurses were sometimes unable, or perhaps unwilling, to provide sufficient milk for the child or children of the family holding them. It is difficult to determine the degree to which this possible act of resistance occurred, but the preponderance of shorter-term contracts where this type of leasing was concerned suggests it was commonplace. The appearance of various contractual conditions related to this very event also supports this assumption. In most leasing contracts for enslaved wet nurses the receiver generally agreed to assume the risk that the enslaved woman would be unable to nurse their children.[[35\]](#_ftn35) In the spring of 1433, for example, an enslaved woman Margarita was leased out to the merchant Giovanni Boecio for a term of three years. The contract stated that she was leased to serve as a wet nurse with the stipulation that any risk of a possible inability to nurse should lie with the receiver Giovanni.[[36\]](#_ftn36) If the Margarita were unwilling to nurse the children of Giovanni, or she was unable to nurse them due to health reasons, she would nevertheless remain in the household of Giovanni for the entire three years.

If an enslaved woman were unable or unwilling to serve as a wet nurse, then the receiver would have options to moderate or terminate the agreement in some instances. In the spring of 1422, for example, an enslaved Circassian woman named Simona was leased out by the notary Giacomo de Palodio to the merchant Ambrogio Giustiniani for a term of three years. The contract stated that should Simona be unable to sufficiently serve as a nurse for the child or children of Ambrogio at any time during the term of the lease, then she could be returned to Giacomo and the monetary amount for the remaining term returned to Ambrogio. This contract offered the guarantee of return during the term of the lease with a pro-rated amount returned to the receiver The lease also stated that Simona could only serve as a wet nurse and was not to be exploited as a household servant nor perform any work outside the house of Ambrogio.[[37\]](#_ftn37) The uncertainty of the term of service, as with the earlier examples, may have represented an additional source of unease for Maria, who could not know if she might suddenly be returned to her previous household. The condition prohibiting household service might again superficially seem like concern for her health and wellbeing, but undoubtedly reflects interest of the slaveholder over the enslaved. Some leasing contracts offered a guarantee of return within a specified time from the start of the lease, generally a month or two. In the autumn of 1456, for example, an enslaved Hungarian woman named Melica was leased out by the shoemaker Pietro de Camera to Giovanni Francesco Spinola for a term of three years to serve as a wet nurse for his family who were living in Pisa. This move from being a servant to an artisanal household in Genoa to being a servant to a noble household in Pisa would have represented a significant change of environment for Melica. But it was a precarious change: if Melica was unable to successfully nurse the child or children of Giovanni Francesco within a month of her arrival in Pisa, then the contract stipulated that she could be returned to Genoa and the entire lease price returned to Giovanni Francesco. The principals also agreed that Giovanni Francesco would return Melica in good health and free from all illness.[[38\]](#_ftn38)

There are also contracts in which the lease payment was reduced if the enslaved woman was unwilling or unable to serve as a nurse for the family of the receiver. In the late autumn of 1477, for example, an enslaved Asian woman named Caterina was leased out by held by the leather worker Giacomo de Arquata to the merchant Antonio de Franchi to serve his family as a wet nurse for a term of three years. The contract stated that should Caterina be unable to sufficiently nurse the child or children of Antonio, then he would have to keep her for the full term, but the price of the lease would be reduced by one half.[[39\]](#_ftn39) The tacit assumption is that Caterina would have continued to be exploited as a household servant and thus Giacomo would have been compensated for the amount typically received for this service.

A reexamination of the participation of the primary social groups in the leasing of women to serve as wet nurses—illustrated in Figure 59 below—reveals some expected and some unexpected demographic trends. Religious persons or persons representing religious institutions did not participate in this aspect of the leasing market. This is not an unexpected phenomenon, as women in religious orders did not generally have need for wet nurses and the enslaved women which they held were probably less likely to become pregnant—especially if their movements were restricted to the grounds of a monastery—and thus less likely to serve as wet nurses. What is most striking when comparing Figure 59 below with the earlier Figure 6 on page 92 is the dominance of men and women from *artefices* families on both sides of the leasing equation.

[ image 702007A2.svg ]

Figure 59: Lenders and receivers in leasing contracts for women serving as wet nurses by social category, 1371–1476. From the subset of 34 leasing contracts recorded by Genoese notaries.

The prevalence of men and women from *artefices* families leasing out enslaved women to serve as wet nurses might be expected: it was common practice for elite families in the Mediterranean regions of the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries to hire poor and working women for this purpose, particularly those from the rural areas adjacent to larger cities.[[40\]](#_ftn40) The prevalence, however, of men and women from *artefices* families receiving enslaved women to serve as wet nurses for themselves might not be expected. The traditional studies tend to frame the receivers of wet nurses as men and women from elite families, but over sixty percent of receivers in Genoa were from *artefices* families. One example has already been illustrated: an enslaved Tatar woman named Lucia serving as a wet nurse in the household of the silk worker Giovanni de Sancto Salvatore.[[41\]](#_ftn41) In another example from the summer of 1447, an enslaved Russian woman named Maria was leased out by Girolamo de Rapallo to a blacksmith, Antonio de Sementia, for a term of three years.[[42\]](#_ftn42) The contract specified a number of conditional options. Antonio had the option to pay Girolamo on a yearly basis for the three years rather than in one lump sum, which was the general custom for leasing contracts. It also allowed him to return Maria to Girolamo after the second year if she was unable to continue to nurse Antonio’s son. Antonio also agreed to provide Girolamo with another servant named Caterina to replace Maria during the term of the lease. This would have allowed him to reduce the lease’s cost by approximately one-half. The terseness of notarial language again masks the underlying motivations, but it seems possible that Maria might have served as a nurse for Antonio so that his unnamed wife could continue to labour in the workshop and not, as is generally the case for elite wives, so that she could become immediately pregnant again. Girolamo was also from an *artefices* family: his father Giovanni was a blacksmith and his brother Battista was a shoemaker[[43\]](#_ftn43) and both were very familiar with the market economies of slavery. In the winter of 1441, for example, a Russian woman named Maria held by his father—the blacksmith Giovanni de Rapallo—was sold to the brothers Giovanni and Bartolomeo Riccio, residents the commune of Albenga, so the presence of enslaved persons in the workshop of his father would not have been an unusual occurrence.[[44\]](#_ftn44) Girolamo was also a blacksmith and would have likely exploited the enslaved Maria for free labour in his workshop before he leased her to Antonio.[[45\]](#_ftn45) This example illustrates that the demand for enslaved women for wet nursing by *artefices* families was largely driven by their need to ensure that the women of their families could continue working without having to tend to infants.

These short-term leasing contracts of enslaved women to serve as wet nurses not only served to prevent the consolidation of kinship ties by enslaved women, but the conditions of return also ensured that these women lived in perpetual uncertainty regarding their places of habitation, which could be changed upon the whim of the household in which they were serving. They may have also, however, inadvertently provided an opportunity for enslaved women to return to the households of their original holders if they were not pleased with their new and unfamiliar environment by feigning an inability to nurse. Further archival research needs to be conducted to elucidate and expand upon the motivations of enslaved women leased as wet nurses in these situations

11.4 Insuring enslaved household servants

Figure 60 illustrates the frequency of *nobiles* families by albergo attested as slaveholders in insurance contracts for enslaved women.

[ image 703000A1.svg ]

Figure 60: The distribution of *nobiles* alberghi specified as purchasers in life insurance contracts for enslaved women. From the dataset of 222 insurance contracts enacted during the period 1400–1510.

A comparison of the ten most active *nobiles* alberghi who purchased life insurance for pregnant enslaved women shown in Table 12 with their proportional attestation as slaveholders in 1459–1463 tax registers reveals some interesting phenomena. Many of the families who held the largest number of enslaved persons—the Spinola, the Doria, the Cattaneo, the Lomellini—were also some of the most frequent purchasers of insurance on enslaved women, as might be expected. The numbers of enslaved persons held by members of *nobiles* alberghi was, for the most part, roughly proportional to the contracting of insurance on enslaved women by these families.

Table 12: Major *nobiles* alberghi named as slaveholders and insurers of enslaved women

| Albergo    | Slaveholders [[46\]](#_ftn46) | Insurers [[47\]](#_ftn47) |
| ---------- | ----------------------------- | ------------------------- |
| Spinola    | 58                            | 18                        |
| Doria      | 48                            | 6                         |
| Salvago    | 44                            | 4                         |
| Cattaneo   | 43                            | 20                        |
| Gentile    | 37                            | 20                        |
| Lomellini  | 36                            | 18                        |
| Grimaldi   | 34                            | 10                        |
| Centurione | 29                            | 2                         |
| de Marini  | 27                            | 6                         |
| Pinelli    | 27                            | 10                        |

One might expect, however, to see greater correlation for the Doria, Salvago, Centurione, and de Marini families, whose number of insurance contracts is proportionally lower. There are several possibilities for this discrepancy. Jacques Heers and Giustina Olgiati both argue that proliferation of life insurance contracts on enslaved women reflected the underlying sexual exploitation of these women by their holder or by other immediate family members.[[48\]](#_ftn48) The regular and persistent sexual abuse of enslaved women is also demonstrated in the analysis in Chapter 10. The lower numbers in this case might suggest that the domestic environment provided by these four families was somehow safer for women, but there is no evidence to support this rather optimistic assumption. Second, it might be the case that enslaved women were exploited across all families in roughly equivalent proportion. If this were true, then perhaps members of these families saw little need to ensure pregnant enslaved women, viewing their lives as not worth insuring.[[49\]](#_ftn49) These families might have also considered that the required premium for the insurance had offered a poor return on their investment in the unlikely case of death. Third, the assumption that an enslaved woman could only become pregnant through an act of exploitation by her slaveholder rendered her as a passive actor in this social dynamic: a role that is not always supported by the historical evidence. Enslaved women could be active participants in these sexual relationships despite their exploitative character.[[50\]](#_ftn50) These women also had some degree of freedom of movement and association: this is revealed in some contracts that specifically delineated their movement as well as some contemporary reportage, such as that described by Paolo Giovio.[[51\]](#_ftn51) The details of Giovio’s sensationalist and voyeuristic account should be approached with extreme scepticism, but it nevertheless supports the presence enslaved women of Genoa in the public sphere.[[52\]](#_ftn52) There are many cases, therefore, where enslaved women were documented as having been in relationships with other enslaved or non-enslaved persons. In the autumn of 1463, for example, the purchase of a house by two enslaved individuals who were married was recorded by the notary Giovanni Danove. The enslaved couple Astelano and Caterina purchased the house from the nobleman Odoardo Lomellini for 100 Genoese lire. Despite having been a married couple, Astelano and Caterina remained enslaved and the legal property of Giacomo de Corsia and Bartolomeo de Podio, respectively. As enslaved people, furthermore, they would not have received a regular salary. At most they might have received a small monthly stipend and occasional gifts of money, but certainly not nearly enough to amass the considerable sum of 100 lire. This was reflected in the *corpus* of the contract which notes that the payment for the house was advanced by Cristoforo de Podio, a relative of Bartolomeo.[[53\]](#_ftn53) A decade earlier, in the autumn of 1453, the same Caterina had been insured by Bartolomeo against the risk of death by childbirth in her eight month of pregnancy.[[54\]](#_ftn54) In this case it would not be unreasonable to assume that the father of her child was the same Astelano rather than the result of sexual exploitation by Bartolomeo. These examples of individual agency are not intended to downplay the exploitation of enslaved women by their holders—which was a real, consistent, and legally sanctioned phenomenon—but rather to suggest the variegated experience of the enslaved in late medieval Genoa and the possibilities for agency. The scarcity and brevity of the sources does not provide a definitive answer to this example nor to the discrepancies between slaveholding and insurance, but all three explanations are likely applicable in some form or another.

**

The exploitation of enslaved persons in the late medieval Genoese Mediterranean for the purpose of household service was commonplace in *nobiles* families. It was also common in certain *mercantes* and *artefices* families, particularly those families where the paterfamilias worked as a notary or some similar professional occupation. The large body of literature on wet nursing in the fifteenth century Mediterranean has largely focused on the employment of poor women for this purpose. This chapter illustrated the prominent role and understudied role played by enslaved women, particularly in the Genoese Mediterranean, as wet nurses for *nobiles* and *populares* families. The insurance of enslaved pregnant women working as household servants in *nobiles* families also reflected the regular and legally sanction sexual abuse they received from their slaveholders or other persons within their household. The closer analysis of these contracts with the demographics of slaveholding by these families also illustrated that some enslaved women were able to seek out and establish sexual relationships on their own outside of the family that held them.

------

[[1\]](#_ftnref1) Luciano Grossi Bianchi and Ennio Poleggi, *Una città portuale del medioevo: Genova nei secoli X–XVI* (Genova: SAGEP, 1987), pp. 225–252.

[[2\]](#_ftnref2) See the description of this trend beginning on page 90.

[[3\]](#_ftnref3) Merchants from *nobiles* families appeared as sellers in 401 sales contracts, buyers in 280 sales contracts, lenders in 88 leasing contracts, and receivers in 88 leasing contracts in which the social group of the transactor was identifiable.

[[4\]](#_ftnref4) The Doria represented approximately 4½ percent of transactors in sales contracts, while the Lomellini represented approximately 11 percent. The Doria *albergo* was, however, approximately twice the size of the Lomellini *albergo*. See Natale Battilana, *Genealogie delle famiglie nobili di Genova* (Genova: Fratelli Pagano, 1825), fasc. “Famiglia Doria” and fasc. “Famiglia Lomellini”, unpaginated plates.

[[5\]](#_ftnref5) Some of these contractual clauses were considered in Chapter 10.

[[6\]](#_ftnref6) Iris Origo, “The Domestic Enemy: The Eastern Slaves in Tuscany in the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Centuries,” *Speculum* 30, no. 3 (1955), p. 340.

[[7\]](#_ftnref7) Mario Ferrara, “Linguaggio di schiave nel Quattrocento,” *Studi di filologia italiana* 8 (1950), pp. 320–1.

[[8\]](#_ftnref8) Giovanni Maria Cecchi, *The Slave Girl*, trans. Bruno Ferraro (Ottawa: Dovehouse Editions, 1996).

[[9\]](#_ftnref9) ASGe, Notai antichi 891, Tommaso Duracino, filza 4, nr. 175, dated 1459-04-18, where “Lodisius de Rocheta quondam Christofori... locavit et titulo locationis concessit et concedit Ieronimo de Auria civi Ianue quondam Baptiste... quandam sclavam dicti Lodisii nominatam Margarita de progenie Iharcasiorum ectatis annorum viginti septe vel circa talem qualem est. Ad habendum tenendum gaudendum possidendum et usufructuandum locationis titulo ut supra hinc ad annos duos proxime venturos... dictam Margaritam pro eius serva et sclava ac alumna pro toto tempore dictorum annorum duorum...”

[[10\]](#_ftnref10) ASGe, Notai antichi 900, Tommaso Duracino, filza 13, series I, nr. 165, dated 1470-03-05, where “Acelinus de Vivaldis civis Ianue quondam Barnabe... locavit et titulo locacionis concessit et concedit Salvago de Vivaldis civi Ianue quondam Lazari presenti stipulanti et recipienti nomine et vice Marietine uxor dicti quondam Lazari de Vivaldis matris dicti Salvagi heredumque et successorum quandam sclavam dicti Acelini nominatam Melicha de progenie Tartarorum ectatis annorum triginta quatuor in circa... quod dicta sclava servire famulari teneatur dicte Marietine...”

[[11\]](#_ftnref11) Refer to Figure 61 on page 322.

[[12\]](#_ftnref12) ASGe, Notai antichi 904, Tommaso Duracino, filza 17, nr. 673, dated 1474-09-17, where “Andreolus Caitus civis Ianue quondam Francisci… vendidit et titulo venditionis dedit et consignavit egregio domino magistro Bapiste de Boninventis medicine doctori quondam Adini... quamdam sclavam dicti Andreoli nominatam Caterina de progenie Maurorum ectatis annorum viginti vel circa...”

[[13\]](#_ftnref13) ASGe, Notai antichi 783, Andrea de Cairo, filza 3, series I, nr. 22, dated 1446-01-25, where “magister Franciscus de Dallo gramatice professor civis Ianue suo proprio et privato et tamquam filius et procurator ac procuratorio nomine domini magistro Antonii de Dallo patris sui etiam gramatice professoris cum pleno et sufficienti mandato... publico instrumento scripto et pubblicato manu Antonioti de Ferrariis notarii anno proxime preterito... vendidit ac titulo et ex causa venditionis dedit tradidit et mandavit... michi dicto notario infrascripto tanquam publice persone officio pubblico… nomine et vice Mathei di ser Antonii de Florentia mercatoris Ianue presentaliter Maiorancis... quandam sclavam olim ipsorum magistrorum Francisci et Antonii vocatam Citam de progenie Rubeorum etatis annorum vigintiquinque vel circa et est illa sclava que usque anno de MCCCCXXXXIIII die XXXI decembris vel circa per ipsos magistros Antonium et Franciscum eidem Matheo ser Antonio vendita fuit...” Francesco de Dallo was the son of Antonio.

[[14\]](#_ftnref14) This form of sales contract, in which an earlier exchange of an enslaved man or woman was formalized at a later point in time, was discussed in greater detail in Chapter 5.

[[15\]](#_ftnref15) Giorgio Costamagna, *Il notaio a Genova tra prestigio e potere* (Roma: Consiglio nazionale del notariato, 1970),
 p. 164.

[[16\]](#_ftnref16) ASGe, Antico comune 107, Magistrorum rationalium apodixie 1411–1412, fol. 43v, as reported by Giovanna Petti Balbi, “Giorgio Stella e gli Annales Genuenses,” *Miscellanea storica ligure* 2 (1961), p. 128.

[[17\]](#_ftnref17) Benjamin Kedar, “The Genoese Notaries of 1382: The Anatomy of an Urban Occupational Group,” in *The Medieval City*, ed. Harry Miskimin, David Herlihy, and Abraham Udovitch (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1977), p. 48.

[[18\]](#_ftnref18) ASGe, Notai antichi 895, Tommaso Duracino, filza 8, nr. 403, dated 1465-07-29, where “Pelegrus de Via civis Ianue quondam Barnabe... vendidit et titulo et ex cause vendicionis dedit et consignavit Nicolao de Credentia cancellario quondam Thome presenti stipulanti recipenti ac ementi pro se et heredibus suis quandam sclavam dicti Pelegri nominatam Cita de progenie ___ ectatis annorum viginti novem vel circa...”

[[19\]](#_ftnref19) The Archivio segreto fond houses twelve large registers in the hand of Niccolò Credenza, whereas the notarial archive has no collection of contracts recorded by him. See ASGe, Pandetta 34/35, pp. 24–6.

[[20\]](#_ftnref20) See the *Instrumentum iuramenti fidelitatis* of the Genoese submission to Milan, dated 1464-06-01, doc. 231, in Jean Dumont, ed., *Corps universel diplomatique du droit des gens. Tome III, parte I* (Amsterdam: Brunel et Wetstein, 1726), pp. 310–3, which notes “Nicolaus de Credentia quondam Thomae publicus Imperiali auctoriate notarius et excelsi communis Ianue cancellarius...”

[[21\]](#_ftnref21) On the various members of the Credenza family who served as chancellors, see Rodolfo Savelli, “Le mani della repubblica: la cancelleria genovese dalla fine del Trecento agli inizi del Seicento,” in *Studi in memoria di Giovanni Tarello. Tomo I* (Milano: Antonio Giuffrè, 1990), pp. 547–52; see also Mario Buongiorno, “Stipendi e ricompense di funzionari della repubblica di Genova nel tardo medioevo,” *Bollettino storico-bibliografico subalpino* 68 (1970), pp. 608–11; Heinrich Sieveking, “Relazione sopra i *Libri Iurium* di Genova,” *Giornale storico e letterario della Liguria* 1ª serie, 8 (1907), pp. 419–20. On the chancellorship of Antonio de Credenza, see Arturo Ferretto, “Lo scisma in Genova negli anni 1404–1409,” *Giornale ligustico di archeologia, storia e letteratura* 21 (1896), pp. 122–3.

[[22\]](#_ftnref22) Luigi Cibrario, *Opuscoli del cavaliere Luigi Cibrario, autore dell’economia politica del Medio Evo* (Torino: Stabilimento tipografico Fontana, 1841), pp. 78–9; Giovanni Andrea Ascheri, *Notizie storiche intorno alla riunione delle famiglie in alberghi in Genova* (Tipografia Faziola, 1846), p. 71; Antonio Bozzo, “L’industria e il commercio in Sestri Ponente nel medio evo,” *Giornale storico e letterario della Liguria* 1ª serie, 7 (1906), pp. 58–9. Cibrario mentions this as one of four transactions relating to enslaved women that he came across in the notarial archives, but he does not provide references to the source material. He also asserts that Antonio was actively involved in the market economy of slavery. Ascheri provides some additional information on the sale but also omits the proper archival citation.

[[23\]](#_ftnref23) Giovanna Petti Balbi, “Il notariato genovese nel Quattrocento,” in *Tra Siviglia e Genova. Notaio, documento e commercio nell’età colombiana*, ed. Vito Piergiovanni (Milano: Antonio Giuffrè, 1994), pp. 116–7.

[[24\]](#_ftnref24) Christiane Klapisch-Zuber, “Parents de sang, parents de lait: la mise en nourrice à Florence (1300–1530),” *Annales de démographie historique* 80 (1983), pp 33–64; a translation of this article was published as a chapter in Id., *Women, Family, and Ritual in Renaissance Italy* (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1987), pp. 132–64.

[[25\]](#_ftnref25) Debra Blumenthal, “With My Daughter’s Milk: Wet Nurses and the Rhetoric of Lactation in Valencian Court Records,” in *Medieval and Renaissance Lactations: Images, Rhetorics, Practices*, ed. Jutta Sperling (Burlington: Ashgate Publishing, 2013), pp. 101–14.

[[26\]](#_ftnref26) Rebecca Winer, “The Mother and the Dida [Nanny]: Female Employers and Wet Nurses in Fourteenth-Century Barcelona,” in *Medieval and Renaissance Lactations: Images, Rhetorics, Practices*, ed. Jutta Sperling (Burlington: Ashgate Publishing, 2013), pp. 55–78. See also Emilie Bergmann, “Milking the Poor: Wet-Nursing and the Sexual Economy of Early Modern Spain,” in *Marriage and Sexuality in Medieval and Early Modern Iberia*, ed. Eukene Lacarra Lanz (New York: Routledge, 2002), pp. 90–114; Charlene Villaseñor Black, “The Moralized Breast in Early Modern Spain,” in *The Material Culture of Sex, Procreation, and Marriage in Premodern Europe*, ed. Karen Encarnación and Anne McClanan (London: Palgrave, 2001), pp. 191–219.

[[27\]](#_ftnref27) Rebecca Winer, “Conscripting the Breast: Lactation, Slavery and Salvation in the Realms of Aragon and Kingdom of Majorca, c. 1250–1300,” *Journal of Medieval History* 34, no. 2 (2008), pp. 164–84, is the only dedicated study of enslaved women as wet nurses in the late medieval Mediterranean. Although it is temporally and geographically situated outside the scope of this study, many of the same practices examined in this paper study remain relevant. For France, see Emmanuel Le Roy Ladurie, *The Peasants of Languedoc* (Champaign: University of Illinois Press, 1976), pp. 111–2.

[[28\]](#_ftnref28) Leone Battista Alberti, *I libri della famiglia*, ed. Francesco Furlan, Ruggiero Romano, and Alberto Tenenti (Torino: Giulio Einaudi, 1994), pp. 34–40; Id., *The Family in Renaissance Florence*, trans. Renée Neu Watkins (Columbia: University of South Carolina Press, 1969), pp. 51–5. For a detailed analysis of Alberti on wet nursing and his use of classical sources, see Julia Hairston, “The Economics of Milk and Blood in Alberti’s *Libri della Famiglia*: Maternal versus Wet-Nursing,” in *Medieval and Renaissance Lactations*, pp. 55–78.

[[29\]](#_ftnref29) Francesco Barbaro, *De re uxoria libri duo* (Amsteldami: Iohannis Ianssonii, 1639), pp. 167–8; the translation is from the edited edition in Benjamin Kohl and Ronald Witt, eds., *The Earthly Republic: Italian Humanists on Government and Society* (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1978), p. 223.

[[30\]](#_ftnref30) Ibid, p. 161 (p. 220 in the translation of Kohl and Witt).

[[31\]](#_ftnref31) These conditions were often indicated as a short phrase of two or three words within larger blocks of boilerplate legal text, the result of which was they were often overlooked by historians.

[[32\]](#_ftnref32) Almost one-quarter of all children abandoned at the Ospedale di San Gallo in Florence between 1430 and 1439 were the offspring of enslaved women. See David Herlihy and Christiane Klapisch-Zuber, *Tuscans and Their Families: A Study of the Florentine Catasto of 1427* (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1985), p. 145.

[[33\]](#_ftnref33) ASGe, Notai antichi 482, Giuliano Canella, register 5, 1415–1417, fol. 54r–v, entry dated 1416-01-09, where “Raffus Specia civis Ianue tanquam dominus et patronus Marie sclave sue lactantis et mame locavit et titulo locationis dedit et concessit ad pensionem Egidio Merello civi Ianue... dictam sclavam lactantem Mariam ut servicia dicte Marie pro filis dicti Egidii… pro mense uno tum iam incepto die prima Ianuarii proxime elapsis... et sic de mense in mense in electione dicti Raffi tum et volente sua pro mercibus et pensiones soldorum triginta Ianuinorum pro dicto mense...”

[[34\]](#_ftnref34) ASGe, Notai antichi 892, Tommaso Duracino, filza 5, nr. 334 (formerly nr. 114), dated 1460-07-04, where “Egideus Sacherus notarius tamquam procurator et procuratorio nomine ut asserit Margaritine matris sui... locavit et titulo locationis concessit et concedit Iohanni de Sancto Salvatore seaterio civi Ianue quondam Caroli... quandam sclavam dicte Margaritine matris sue cum lacte de progenie Tartarorum nominatam Luciam ectatis annorum triginta vel circa... ad annum unum proxime venturos... quod si dictus Iohannes voluerit et ellegerit facere presenti locacione dictam sclavam dicto locacionis titulo pro annis duobus tunc proxime seccuturis et dicti pro pensione predicta quod id faciens possit et ex nunc presens locatio inter se extendere predictis aliis annis duobus modis et formis predictis hoc semper intelecto quod si dicta sclava intra dictum tempus presentis locacionis se ingravidaretur quod tunc et eo casu presens locacio non habeat locum...” Margarita was the mother of the notary Egidio Sacherio who also acted as her procurator in the contract.

[[35\]](#_ftnref35) This risk was implicit in the structure of the contract but sometimes the notary made specific mention of it.

[[36\]](#_ftnref36) ASGe, Notai antichi 565, Biagio Foglietta, filza 1, nr. 425, dated 1433-04-09, where “Violante filia quondam Bernardi Calcine et uxor magistri Iohannis Micaelis de Valentia... locavit... Iohanni Boecio” of the enslaved Margarita where the contract is “acto in principio medio et fine presentis instrumenti et qualibet parte ipsius quod in casu quo lac deficaret dicte Margarite infra dictum tempus quod id sit et restet rixico et periculo dicti Iohannis et non dicte Violantis...” The slaveholder Violante de Calcine was the wife of the Valencian merchant named Juan de Michele. See Christoph Cluse, “Frauen in Sklaverei: Beobachtungen aus genuesischen Notariatsregistern des 14. und 15. Jahrhunderts,” in *Campana pulsante convocati: Festschrift anläßlich der Emeritierung von Prof. Dr. Alfred Haverkamp*, ed. Alfred Haverkamp and Frank Hirschmann (Trier: Kliomedia, 2005), p. 100.

[[37\]](#_ftnref37) ASGe, Notai antichi 601, Francesco Casanova, filza 2, series I, nr. 85, dated 1422-04-23, where “Iacobus de Palodio notarius civis Ianue locavit et titulo locaconis concessit domino Ambroxio Iustiniano de Bancha civi Ianue... quandam sclavam ipsius Iacobi de progenie Iarchasorum nomine Symon etatis annorum XXVI in circa tamquam baiullam nutricem seu mamam et pro baiullam usque an annos tres proxime venturos... quod si forte contingerit quod infra spacium dictorum trium annorum dicta sclava careret lacte quod nutrire et baiulare non posset filium dicti domini Ambroxii sufficienter tunc et eo casu liceat predicto Ambroxio restituere et relaxare dictam sclavam dicto Iacobo et dictus Iacobus teneatur et debeat reddere et restituere dicto domino Ambroxio residuum dictarum librarum quinquaginta...”

[[38\]](#_ftnref38) ASGe, Notai antichi 889, Tommaso Duracino, filza 2, series II, nr. 261, dated 1456-10-19, where “Petrus de Camera calsolaris civis Ianue quondam Antonio... locavit et titulo locacionis dedit concessit et consignavit nobili Branchaleone de Auria civi Ianue quondam Baptiste... sclavam dicti Petri nominatam Melicham de progenie Ungarorum ectatis annorum triginta octo vel circa... ad annos tres proxime venturos... quia dicto Branchaleo aservit facisse et facere dictam locationis pro ac nomine et vice Iohannis Franciscus Spinula presentialiter existentis in Pissis et... si dicta sclava postquam apluerit in Pissis ex inde ad mensem unum non habebit sufficienciam lactis ad lactandum ac nutriendum filium quendam dictis Iohannis Francisci quod tunc et eo causa et ex nunc pro ut ex tunc et ex tunc pro ut ex nunc presens instrumentum pro caso et nullo habeatur dicto Branchaleo sive alius pro eo possit et valeat idem Petro reddere et restituere dictam sclavam...” Giovanni Francesco was not present at the enactment of the lease and was represented by the nobleman Brancaleone Doria, who had been named as his procurator.

[[39\]](#_ftnref39) ASGe, Notai antichi 917, Giovanni Danove, filza 2, series II, nr. 156, dated 1470-12-20, where “Iacobus de Arquata cordoanerius quondam Rainardi... locavit Antonio de Franchis de Andronici... quandam sclavam nomine Caterina de progenie Asiarum etatis annorum XXIIII in circa... ad annos tres proxime die XVIII novemberis... si durantibus dictis annis tribus dicta Caterina cateret lactem” then the yearly amount of the lease would be reduced from 20 to 10 Genoese lire per year. This is the only case where I found the regional provenance of an enslaved person described as “de progenie Asiarum.” I am unsure to what region it refers, but it is likely somewhere east of the standard slaving zones surrounding the Black Sea, perhaps even an enslaved woman from an eastern locale such as of Mongolia or China.

[[40\]](#_ftnref40) For Florence, see David Herlihy and Christiane Klapisch-Zuber, *Tuscans and Their Families: A Study of the Florentine Catasto of 1427* (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1985), pp. 135–6. In his study of the Ospedale degli Innocenti in Florence, Philip Gavitt reflected this demand by elite families when he suggested that “the Innocenti acted as a referral service for wealthy families to recruit their own good wet nurses.” See his *Charity and Children in Renaissance Florence: The Ospedale degli Innocenti, 1410–1536* (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1990), p. 201.

[[41\]](#_ftnref41) ASGe, Notai antichi 892, Tommaso Duracino, filza 5, nr. 334 (formerly nr. 114), dated 1460-07-04; see note 34 on page 309 for details on this contract.

[[42\]](#_ftnref42) ASGe, Notai antichi 493, Lorenzo Villa, filza 7, nr. 412, dated 1447-08-11, where “Ieronimus de Rapalo Iohannis locavit et titulo locationis dedit et concessit Antonio Sementia fabro Christofori... sclavam unam ipsius Ieronimi cum lacte de progenie Rubeorum vocatam Mariam usque ad annos tres proxime venturos inceptos die prima Ianuarii proximi preteriti... debentur ipsi Antonio per dictum Ieronimum occasione salarii Catarine serve ipsius Antonii quam mittere promisit ad domum dicti Ieronimi hodie per totam diem...”. The enslaved Maria was leased for 20 Genoese lire per year, and in receiving the enslaved Caterina, Girolamo agreed to reimburse Antonio for 11 lire per year, leaving an effective cost of 9 lire per year for Antonio. See Tria, *La schiavitù in Liguria*, doc. 52, pp. 183–4.

[[43\]](#_ftnref43) ASGe, Notai antichi 888, Tommaso Duracino, filza 1, series I, nr. 154, dated 1453-11-02, an acquittal of debt by Caterina Xabe, the wife of the deceased Giacomo Tatardo, from the commune of Alessandria in Lombardia, for Agostino Frascaria for 80 Genoese lire and two shares in the Casa di San Giorgio, in which one of the witnesses was named as “Baptista de Rapallo calsolario quondam Iohannis cive Ianue.”

[[44\]](#_ftnref44) ASGe, Notai antichi 653, Branca Bagnara, filza 6, series II, nr. 40, dated 1441-02-22, where “Iohannes de Rappalo faber quondam Pasqualis civis Ianue... vendidit et titulo et ex causa venditionis dedit cessit tradidit Iohnni Ricio de Albingum et Bartholomeo Ricio fratribus filiis quondam domini Iacarii... quandam sclavam dicti Iohannis de Rappalo vocatam Maria etatis annorum triginta vel circa de progenie Rubeorum...”

[[45\]](#_ftnref45) ASCGe, Manoscritti 56, Delle nobili famiglie genovesi libro secondo, fol. 225r, which notes “Geronimo fabro in cartulario di Melidux Salvago 1447… quondam Iohannis in Antonio de Luco 1452.”

 

[[46\]](#_ftnref46) From ASGe, San Giorgio 33744, for the years 1459–63.

[[47\]](#_ftnref47) From the dataset of 222 contracts for the years 1400–1510.

[[48\]](#_ftnref48) Heers, *Esclaves et domestiques au Moyen Âge, pp. 216–8;* Olgiati, ed., *Genova, porta del mondo*, pp. 79–80.

[[49\]](#_ftnref49) Andrea Doria, the famous admiral and *pater patriae* of the Doria family (and of the Republic of Genoa itself after 1532) viewed enslaved men as disposable commodities, to be worked until death and then replaced. Steven Epstein notes how the admiral preferred to exploit enslaved men in his Genoese galleys since they were ultimately cheaper than hiring poor labourers for the same work. See Steven Epstein, *Genoa and the Genoese, 958–1528* (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1996), p. 316; see also Edoardo Grendi, “Andrea Doria, uomo del Rinascimento,” *Atti della società ligure di storia patria* 2ª serie, 19, no. 1 (1979), p. 106, who provides the grim actuarial breakdown.

[[50\]](#_ftnref50) Elisa María Ferreira Priegue, “La cesión de bienes a terceros: el recurso de un gallego en la Génova del siglo XV,” *Semata: ciencias sociais e humanidades* 18 (2007), pp. 251–2.

[[51\]](#_ftnref51) See the analysis regarding social control in Chapter 10.

[[52\]](#_ftnref52) Paolo Giovio, *Notable Men and Women of Our Time* (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2013), pp. 415–7; see the introduction of Part III of this study on page 237.

[[53\]](#_ftnref53) ASGe, Notai antichi 916, Giovanni Danove, filza 1, series II, nr. 169, dated 1463-04-15, where “Odoardus Lanellus quondam Iohannis... vendidit et titulo et ex causa vendicionis dedit cessit tradidit et mandavit seu quasi Astelano olim servo Iacopo de Corsio et Caterine uxor dicti Astelani olim serve quondam Bartholomei de Podio... domum sitam Ianue in contracta Sanctorum Cosime et Damiani... pro pretio et finito pretio librarum centum Ianuinorum... quas dictus Odoardus suo et dicto nomine confessus fuit et confitetur habuisse et recepisse a dictis Astelano et Caterina in peccunia numerata videlicet a Cristoforo de Podio...”

[[54\]](#_ftnref54) ASGe, Notai antichi 888, Tommaso Duracino, filza 1, series I, nr. 120, dated 1453-09-10, where “Cataneus de Grimaldis civis Ianue quondam Ianus... recognovit et recognoscit Benedicto de Corsio civi Ianue... habuisse et recepisse tantam quantitatem suarum rerum et mercium bonarum et mercantilium... cum effectu hinc ad menses tres proxime venturos libras centum quinquaginta Ianuinorum... si quedam sclava dicti Benedecti vocata Christiana ectatis annorum triginta quinque in circa de progenie Tartarorum nunc gravida seu pregnans mensium octo in circa de partu suo et de dicte eius pregnacione... sana et viva evaserit tunc et eo causa presens instrumentum sit cassum irritum et nullum...”