# Chapter 12 Enslaved persons in the workplace: slaveholding and workshop labour in the Genoese Mediterranean

The elite families of the late medieval Genoese Mediterranean were instrumental in financing and structuring the market economy of slavery. The analysis of sales, leasing, insurance, and manumission contracts that constituted the structural backbone of this market in Chapter 4 revealed the significant and consistent presence of men and women from *artefices* families named as slaveholders in these contracts.[[1\]](#_ftn1) The notaries enacting these contract recorded the occupation for over half the artisans named in these contracts and the distribution of these occupations provides an important insight into the specific industries the labour of enslaved persons were exploited in the Genoese Mediterranean. This chapter will briefly outline and enumerate the categories of artisans who held enslaved persons and will follow with a detailed examination of the three most common occupational categories: silk workers, wool workers, and metal workers. The contracts were written from the view of the slaveholders, but the close and contextual reading of these contracts will not only offer insights into the artisans who held the enslaved, but also into the working conditions experienced by the enslaved who were forced into the often-dangerous world of workshop labour.

## 12.1 Artisans in the market economy of slavery

Figure 61 below illustrates the participation of the *artefices* in sales contracts enacted in market economy of slavery according to the occupational categories described in Chapter 3.[[2\]](#_ftn2)

[ image 701004A3.svg ]

Figure 61: Participation of the *artefices* by occupational category in the sales of the enslaved, 1348–1528. From the dataset of 632 sales contracts where the occupation was stated.

In the realm of manufacturing, artisans from the textile, leather, and metallurgical industries were the most active participants in the market economy of slavery. Urban workshops were permitted by guild regulations to employ enslaved persons for production, but, like the poor women and widows who served as wage laborers, the enslaved were also prohibited from practicing any aspects of the trade covered by guild protection.[[3\]](#_ftn3) This included both the production of goods and their subsequent commerce. Even the lucky few formerly enslaved persons who had been fully emancipated were generally barred from practicing the trades, despite their newfound social status.[[4\]](#_ftn4) For the most part, enslaved persons were used by craftsmen for the most dangerous, labour-intensive, and menial tasks required in artisanal workshops. This section will examine participation of silk workers, wool and leather workers, metal workers, and urban professionals in sales and leasing contracts for enslaved persons.

Figure 62 illustrates the participation of the *artefices* in the leasing of enslaved persons according to same occupational categories. In the realm of manufacturing, artisans from the textile (silk and wool), leather, and metallurgical industries were the most active participants in this aspect of the market economy of slavery. A few patterns are immediately apparent. Urban professionals were the most active figures in this market, as one might expect, accounting for the largest proportion of lenders and receivers. Their proximity to the merchant *nobiles* and political classes—serving as notaries, lawyers, chancellors, doctors, and the like—would have not only brought them into closer contact into the markets of slavery, but also these positions would have allowed them to accumulate the significant financial capital required for direct participation in these markets.

[ image 702004A1.svg ]

Figure 62: Participation of the *artefices* by occupational category in the leasing of the enslaved, 1370–1500. From contracts where the occupation of one or more principals was stated.

There was a considerable proportion of artisans, nevertheless, who participated as lenders and receivers in this aspect of the market economy of slavery, with roughly similar proportions to those artisans who were named in sales contracts. While one might expect that men and women from *artefices* families would be far more active as receivers—in order to exploit the enslaved as labourers in their workshops—they were also quite active as lenders. The following sections will consider the activities of the three most common groups of artisanal slaveholders in the late medieval Genoese Mediterranean: silk workers, wool workers, and metal workers.

## 12.2 Enslaved persons in the silk industry

The *artefices* most active in the commercial exchange of enslaved persons were textile workers associated with the silk industry. The expansion of the Mediterranean silk industry during the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries occurred alongside the similar expansion of the Mediterranean slave trade. The Genoese used their colonial advantage in the eastern Mediterranean and their commercial contacts in southern Italy to provide a steady supply of the raw material necessary to produce silk cloth.[[5\]](#_ftn5) Genoa was thus a net producer of silk by the fifteenth century and had developed a significant trade surplus in silk by the sixteenth century. Osvaldo Baffico, for example, has shown how the Genoese Brignole albergo imported large quantities of raw silk from Messina, Calabria, and Naples in the early sixteenth century, which would then be processed in their workshops into refined silk cloth, a large portion of which was sold locally to foreign merchants or exported by local merchants to foreign ports.[[6\]](#_ftn6)

The production of silk during the late medieval era required a distinct division of labour in two stages of manufacturing. The first stage involved the transformation of the raw cocoons produced by silkworms into usable threads through the processes of reeling, winding, spinning, and dyeing. The work of winding and spinning was repetitive and laborious low wage work whose practitioners were not accorded the rights and privileges granted to recognized artisans, and thus the protection of a guild. The dyers were specialized manufacturers of ingredients used for colouring silk as well as other textiles, and as such, they were active across the entire cloth industry and had a long-established guild of their own. The second stage involved the creation of silk fabrics from completed threads through the processes of warping and weaving. Like spinning and winding, these were also laborious low-wage jobs without guild protection. The entire multi-stage process was overseen by the silk-merchant—the *seaterius* in the contracts—who managed the shop and subcontracted the various stages of production. It was these silk-merchants who founded the *Artes seateriorum*—the Genoese silk guild—in the year 1432 and worked relentlessly to ensure that spinners, weavers, and warpers remained wage labourers and could not ascend to guild membership. Even though the guild assured that these occupations paid low wages, the cost of labour in the production of silk should not be underestimated. Paola Massa Piergiovanni estimates that the cost of labour represented approximately one-third of the cost of finished silk product in fifteenth century Genoa.[[7\]](#_ftn7) It was probably even greater: the use of enslaved persons as unpaid labourers by silk workers would have certainly depressed the real cost of production. Nicholas Terpstra has outlined similar decreases in the cost of silk production in sixteenth-century Florence—and a corresponding increase in profits for silk merchants—when wage labourers were replaced by children from orphanages and foundling homes.[[8\]](#_ftn8)

The high labour costs of producing silk cloth, coupled with the repetitive and strenuous work involved in spinning and weaving the threads, led to the increased exploitation of enslaved women in the workshops of silk-merchants. Almost all enslaved persons held by silk workers were women.[[9\]](#_ftn9) This preference was not just a Genoese phenomenon. In the Ottoman empire, for example, enslaved women were increasingly exploited for the manufacture of silk in the workshops of Bursa and other urban locales.[[10\]](#_ftn10) And Luca Molà similarly describes the presence of enslaved labour in the silk workshops of Venice.[[11\]](#_ftn11) Piergiovanni asserts that enslaved women were forced to work primarily as spinners and the appearance of regulations regarding the work of enslaved persons in the first edition of the guild statutes illustrates that their labour was fundamental from the earliest stages of the Genoese silk industry.[[12\]](#_ftn12)

The statutes of the Genoese silk merchant guild issued in the year 1432 specifically refer to the practice of employing enslaved persons in workshops and the restrictions regarding their participation in the craft.[[13\]](#_ftn13) The guild allowed its members to teach the fundamentals of silk manufacturing to enslaved individuals under their charge, but if the enslaved man or woman should be freed at some later point in time, they would be unable to apply the skills that they had learned in the workshop as independent operators. Enslaved persons, therefore, could not become a member of the guild, nor could they own or manage a silk workshop, and they also were forbidden from participating in the commercial aspects of the trade, under the penalty of 100 Genoese lire per infraction. They could only apply their skills in the labour-intensive and thankless tasks that were allocated to wage labourers and the enslaved.[[14\]](#_ftn14) These rigid regulations regarding the work of enslaved and formerly enslaved persons were later adopted by other guilds. The 1465 statutes of the dyer’s guild, for example, contained remarkably similar regulations delineating the work of formerly enslaved persons in the dyeing industry.[[15\]](#_ftn15) This prohibition against the enslaved and formerly enslaved participating in guild activities within the republic of Genoa and its colonies stood in contrast to several eastern Mediterranean locales where their participation was often tolerated. In the Byzantine Empire, for example, both the enslaved and formerly enslaved were active participants in local economies as silk merchants and silk dyers. Imperial law, in force from the ninth century onwards, allowed these individuals to enter the silk guild if they had five guarantors, and in the case of the enslaved, that their holder provided an adequate surety.[[16\]](#_ftn16)

The contracts enacted by Genoese notaries document the active participation of silk workers as buyers and sellers in the market economy of slavery. They were by far the most active purchasers of the enslaved amongst the *artefices* of late medieval Genoa and they were also moderately active as sellers. The contracts of Tommaso Duracino recorded the purchase of several enslaved women by artisans associated with the production of silk thus implicitly illustrating the presence of the enslaved in the households and workshops of silk workers.[[17\]](#_ftn17) In the autumn of 1478, for example, an enslaved Circassian woman named Margarita was purchased by the silk worker Antonio de Costa from the widow Bertina Usodimare.[[18\]](#_ftn18) In another contract enacted during the winter of 1495, an enslaved baptized Muslim woman named Isabella was purchased by silk worker Leonardo de Aznola from the Iberian merchant Juan de Castilegia. In the second case, Isabella was exchanged for a measure of green and black coloured silk cloth valued at two hundred Genoese lire.[[19\]](#_ftn19) The children and young women held by silk workers in sales contracts ranged from twelve to twenty-two years of age and they were likely forced to work in labour-intensive processes of reeling and spinning the silk from the cocoons of the silkworm.[[20\]](#_ftn20) This delicate and time-consuming task had traditionally been the domain of poor women and widows, and as such, it was a gendered occupation that paid a very low wage, although it was a marginally higher wage than comparable work in the wool industry. In Florence, for example, Sharon Strocchia has illustrated the dominance of impoverished girls and women in the roles of reeling and spinning silk for fifteenth century convents, in which the resident nuns functioned as brokers for local silk merchants.[[21\]](#_ftn21) It is not particularly surprising, therefore, that some artisans would also attempt to exploit enslaved women in this form of work. While silk workers were more likely to be named on the buying side of sales contracts—obtaining enslaved persons to exploit in their workshops and households—they also participated in the selling of enslaved persons. In the spring of 1474, for example, an enslaved Circassian woman named Cita was sold by the silk dyer Battista Perolerio to the Aragonese merchant Mateu Viacamps, who was a regular presence in the bustling commerce conducted in the port of Genoa.[[22\]](#_ftn22) In another contract from the autumn of 1480 an enslaved Albanian man named Teodoro was sold by the silk worker Agostino de Facio to the brothers Francisco and Manuel de Amandola, who were merchants from the Biscay region of north Iberia.[[23\]](#_ftn23) It might be the case that these enslaved persons were purchased based on their experience in the silk industry and that they would be exploited in workshops in the Iberian Peninsula. There needs to be further archival research done to determine the destinations of these enslaved individuals.

The silk worker Giovanni Mangiavacca also made several incursions into the market economy of slavery. In the summer of 1471 he purchased an enslaved Bulgarian woman named Margarita from the merchant Borruele Salvago.[[24\]](#_ftn24) Before the year had ended, Giovanni resold Margarita to the merchant Lodisio Grimaldi and collected a small profit of about two-and-a-half Genoese lire.[[25\]](#_ftn25) The rationale for this rather quick exchange was not recorded by the notary. The enslaved Margarita was declared in good health in both sales contracts and there were no indications of any moral or criminal transgressions on her part that might have prompted the resale.[[26\]](#_ftn26) She could had been held by Borruele Salvago for some time and would have forced into household service for his family. In this case she might have had a tough time adapting to the strange world of urban artisanal labour. She might have also been a new arrival to the city, brought into the city by Borruele himself or someone associated with his albergo, as merchants from the Salvago family were central participants in the eastern Mediterranean slaving enterprise.[[27\]](#_ftn27) She probably worked alone in the workshop of Giovanni or alongside people with whom she could not converse, in a dusty and noisy workshop busy with the comings and goings of merchants, inspectors, wage labourers and other artisans. She might have also been the only enslaved woman and the only person of eastern European descent in the workshop.[[28\]](#_ftn28) Even though she was a forced laborer, the combination of one or more these social factors would have certainly hampered her productivity. Perhaps Giovanni realized that costs associated with housing, feeding, and clothing Margarita were greater than the lower costs of employing the local poor and destitute as wage laborers. It might also have been the case that Margarita actively resisted the unfamiliar environment of the workshop by being deliberately unproductive and not properly conducting the tasks to which she was assigned. The contracts are silent about any motivations on her part, and we can only speculate until additional archival documents are uncovered.

Another possibility is that Giovanni had no intentions of exploiting Margarita for manual labour, at least not in the long-term. Instead, he might have taken the opportunity to participate in the secondary market for enslaved persons. As an urban artisan, Giovanni would have regularly observed the preponderance of enslaved eastern European women in streets, *piazze*, and shops of the city. He also would have been aware of the continuous demand for young women from the Black Sea region by elite merchant families. The rather unorthodox price of 207 lire and 10 soldi of Genoese currency for the initial purchase of Margarita suggests that some haggling might have been done on the part of Giovanni.[[29\]](#_ftn29) The prices agreed upon in most sales contracts were almost always rounded to the nearest ten lire. These rounded figures reflected the influence of the *nobiles* in the market economy of slavery, for whom a few soldi would have little bearing on their overall accounts. Giovanni turned this rounding to his advantage at the time of the resale, receiving the rounded sum of 210 Genoese lire. The transfer from the noisy and boisterous urban workshop of Giovanni Mangiavacca to the elite household of Lodisio Grimaldi would have been a significant environmental change for Margarita. In this (supposedly) serene and refined space, she would have been segregated from much of urban society, forced to work for his family as a domestic servant, and furthermore, might have been subject to sexual exploitation from Lodisio and other men of the household. In the large-scale Mediterranean network of enslavement, this might seem to represent the inevitable geographical endpoint of her forced migration, as most enslaved women were generally exploited for household service.[[30\]](#_ftn30)

But Giovanni was not yet finished participating in this aspect of the market economy of slavery. Six years later, in the autumn of 1477, the silk worker purchased an enslaved child from north Africa named Caterina from the blacksmith Giovanni Maria de Monleone. It seems that Caterina had been suffering from “tinea capitis,” a fungal infection of the scalp, for approximately a year or so. The contract therefore stipulated that the seller Giovanni Maria would obtain and pay for proper medical help for Caterina. If she could not be cured of the disease within one year, then the conditions of the sale allowed Giovanni to return Margarita and receive back the full purchase price.[[31\]](#_ftn31) It appears that the treatment was successful, as both Giovanni and Margarita disappeared from the documentary record after this sale. In these cases, we again see the bilateral exchange of enslaved women between noble merchants and urban artisans, with the two occupational groups both acting as buyers and sellers. The contract also reveals one of the health issues faced by enslaved persons in Genoa labouring in the workshop of blacksmiths. Tinea capitis is an infection caused by a fungus that thrives in warm and moist environments.[[32\]](#_ftn32) The workshop of the late medieval blacksmith was dominated by blast furnaces that were constantly being heated and cooled by the application of copious quantities of water, making it an ideal environment for the transmission of this disease.[[33\]](#_ftn33)

## 12.3 Enslaved persons in the wool industry

Although silk workers were the most active occupational group from the *artefices* in the market economy of slavery, workers in other textile and clothing industries also took the opportunity to increase their financial capital through the exploitation of enslaved workers. Figure 62 shows that wool workers and leather workers were principals in approximately one-quarter of all sales contracts involving persons from *artefices* families.

The process of converting raw wool into woolen cloth was analogous to the process of converting raw silk into silk cloth, but the work was generally much more labour intensive. There were many additional preparatory tasks required in the cleaning and processing of the raw wool. These low skill tasks centered around washing and combing—activities that were much dirtier and which required a greater degree of physical labour than the activities required for the processing of silk.[[34\]](#_ftn34) One might therefore expect that wool workers would exploit enslaved men for this labour. Just as many enslaved women as men, however, toiled in these shops, illustrating again that hard labour was not only the domain of poor and enslaved men in the late medieval Mediterranean world. The purchase of enslaved persons in the wool industry was primarily made by the wool merchant, the so-called *lanerius* who owned the workshop and was responsible for managing the entire process of converting raw wool into finished cloth, although there are instances where wool combers and dyers of woolen cloth had also purchased enslaved women. In the summer of 1461, for example, an enslaved Circassian woman named Caterina was purchased by the wool comber Giovanni de Toporis from wool merchant Guglielmo Carezza.[[35\]](#_ftn35) There is a strong possibility that Giovanni was one of the workers regularly contracted by the merchant Guglielmo to produce woolen cloth. In another contract from the autumn of 1464, an enslaved Bulgarian woman named Elena was sold by the former *burgensis* of Pera named Giovanni de Molinariis to the master dyer Battista Berlenda.[[36\]](#_ftn36) The dyer was a resident of the port town of Varazze, about 40 km west of Genoa, and was in Genoa to conduct the purchase. The seller Giovanni might have obtained Elena while he was living in Pera and brought her to Genoa after the Ottomans captured the colony in 1453. It might also be the case, given her relatively youthful age of eighteen years, that she was the daughter of another enslaved woman already owned by Giovanni. In any case, this exchange represented another abrupt change of environment, as she would have first been removed from Pera (possibly) and transported to Genoa, and then taken to Varazze to provide forced labour in the workshop of Battista.

The wool merchant was also the primary participant in the sale of enslaved persons in the wool industry, although there are cases of drapers and wool washers also named as sellers in this activity. In the summer of 1485, for example, an enslaved Turkish woman named Fatima held by the draper Francesco de Saulo was sold to the nobleman Cristoforo Centurione.[[37\]](#_ftn37) The transition from the workshop and household of the draper to a *nobilis* household of the wealthy Centurione alberghi would have represented a major change of environment for Fatima. In another contract from the summer of 1448, an enslaved Tatar woman named Caterina held by the wool washer Simone de Vigenio was sold to the silk spinner Pietro de Opertis.[[38\]](#_ftn38) In this second case Caterina would move between two artisanal environments—albeit from that of a wool worker to the generally more prosperous silk worker—and she might have been able to adapt fairly quickly. The participation of wool workers in the market economy of slavery—as with the silk workers described in the previous section—often reflected the bilateral exchange of enslaved women between noble merchants and urban artisans and thus the instantiation of the important weak network ties between families from these two social categories.

The regular presence of enslaved persons in the shops of wool workers was also revealed in their regulatory statutes. The statutes of the Genoese wool workers guild—the *Artes pateriorum*—was issued in the year 1407 and specified that it was illegal for wool workers to purchase clothing and other forms of finished cloth from enslaved individuals as well as formerly enslaved individuals.[[39\]](#_ftn39) Enslaved and formerly enslaved persons were also forbidden to sell the various raw materials used by workshops in the wool industry. These restrictions would have certainly limited the roles that the enslaved and formerly enslaved could take within the industry. Steven Epstein suggests, furthermore, that these regulations reflected an underlying suspicion that enslaved persons were prone to stealing clothing and other items from their holders.[[40\]](#_ftn40) This acknowledgment of fear of theft in the guild statutes likely reflected some degree of actual theft by the enslaved from those who held them in captivity, a phenomenon that Eugene Genovese has categorized as one of several forms of “day-to-day resistance to slavery.”[[41\]](#_ftn41)

The wool merchant Stefano de Clavaro was particularly active in the market economy of slavery, purchasing five enslaved women over a fifteen-year period in the late fifteenth century. Stefano was part of a family of wool merchants: his father Leone, brother Pietro, and son Pantaleone were also wool merchants active in the production of woolen cloth.[[42\]](#_ftn42) The family operated out of the port town of Chiavari, about 30 km east of the city of Genoa on the Ligurian coast, which was a bustling commercial entrepôt during the fifteenth century and an important part of the larger republic of Genoa. The Genoese humanist Giacomo Bracelli described the city as a commercial centre for the surrounding region and with a population greater than 2500 families in the first half of the fourteenth century.[[43\]](#_ftn43) Anselmo Adorno, a merchant from Bruges with Genoese ancestry, passed through the town on his pilgrimage to the Holy Land in 1470, taking note of its vibrant commercial activity and trade in woolen cloth.[[44\]](#_ftn44) The family of Stefano de Clavaro probably operated a central workshop in the city where they employed apprentices, skilled artisans, and wage labourers, although much of this work was certainly outsourced to secondary workshops and homes in Chiavari and the numerous villages of the surrounding Fontanabuona valley. This corresponds to the concept of the Verlagssystem or “putting-out system” described by Fernand Braudel, in which the early modern wool merchant managed a network of outsourced workers and workshops in urban and rural locales from a centrally located urban workshop.[[45\]](#_ftn45) The family firm seemed to be quite large, given that Stefano himself took on at least nine apprentices—each of whom agreed to perform six years of service—over a fifteen year period between 1481 and 1496.[[46\]](#_ftn46) Stefano made his first incursion into the market economy of slavery in the autumn of 1471, purchasing an enslaved Hungarian woman named Elena from the consanguineous and religious sisters Battistina and Brigida Spinola, both of whom served as nuns at the monastery of Santa Barnabà. In this contract, Stefano agreed to receive Elena on behalf of himself and his heirs—which was the standard declaration—as well as on behalf of his father Leone and his heirs.[[47\]](#_ftn47) This declaration supports the assumption based on earlier analyses in this section that Elena was destined for forced labour in the family workshops and not only as a personal servant in the household of Stefano. One month later Stefano purchased another enslaved woman, a Tatar named Maddalena, from the nobleman Francesco Cattaneo.[[48\]](#_ftn48) He returned to the city of Genoa in the winter of 1474 where he purchased the baptized Muslim named Maddalena from the merchant Giorgio Lomellini.[[49\]](#_ftn49) In another contract enacted over a decade later in the spring of 1486, he purchased an enslaved Circassian woman named Lucia from the heirs of the recently deceased *nobleman* Anfreone Squarciafico.[[50\]](#_ftn50) The only attestation of Stefano as a seller of enslaved women occurred in the winter of 1486, where he sold an enslaved Tatar child named Caterina to the merchant Angelo de Miardo.[[51\]](#_ftn51) The contract did not specify how Stefano came to be holding the twelve-year-old Caterina, but there was a strong probability that she was the child of another one of the enslaved women being forced to labour in his workshop, perhaps even the daughter of Maddalena whom he had purchased about twelve years earlier.

The solitary existence of enslaved textile workers was reflected in an inventory of goods recorded in the summer of 1408 for the recently deceased wool worker Giovanni Riccio. Appearing in the prosaic accounting of his possessions and commodities was an unnamed enslaved man of Tatar origin who was declared as being approximately twenty years of age.[[52\]](#_ftn52) This unfortunate young man was listed among the assorted items contained in Giovanni’s workshop—not among the items contained in his home—suggesting that he both worked and lived in the shop. His association and placement with the inventory of the workshop also supports the earlier assertions in this section, namely that the *artefices* purchased the enslaved for labourers in workshops and not for domestic service. The enslaved man would have been passed down through inheritance—as a dehumanized item of inventory—to Dexerino and Bartolomeo Riccio, the sons of Giovanni. The same Dexerino and Bartolomeo were recorded fifteen years later as the sellers of an enslaved Russian named Martino who was specified as approximately thirty-three years of age.[[53\]](#_ftn53) The close estimations of age and that the enslaved man was held by the heirs suggests that this Martino might very well be the same person enumerated in the workshop of the deceased Giovanni, even though his regional provenance was specified differently in the two contracts.[[54\]](#_ftn54) If this is the case—and it is a likely one—then his sale to Giovanni de Toirano meant that he was likely brought out of the city to the mountain village of Toirano, probably to continue working as an artisan labourer in the flourishing wool industry in and around that region.[[55\]](#_ftn55)

## 12.4 Enslaved persons in the metallurgical arts

Metal workers were another occupational group of artisans who were regular participants in the market economy of slavery. Figure 62 shows that metal workers were named as principals in approximately fifteen percent of all sales contracts involving persons from the *artefices* social category. The most arduous and dangerous crafts in late medieval Genoa were probably those of the metallurgical industry: blacksmiths, coopers, goldsmiths, and other metal workers. The workshops of these artisans were driven by large furnaces that produced the high levels of heat necessary to melt a variety of metals, and as such were hot, dangerous, dirty, and generally very unhealthy environments.[[56\]](#_ftn56) The presence of a large population of enslaved persons within the city offered an alternative workforce of involuntary laborers to perform many of the dangerous and burdensome tasks required in metal working that were generally consigned to the urban and rural poor. These tasks included the tending of the large fires required by blast furnaces to melt various forms of metal, the transport and application of large quantities of water required to moderate the temperature of these furnaces and cool the metals, which often required repeated heating and forging, and the transport and handling of large quantities of wood and metal.[[57\]](#_ftn57) The sales contracts named several occupations within the metal industry as buyers and sellers of enslaved persons of which blacksmiths figured most prominently.

In the winter of 1456, for example, an enslaved Circassian man named Martino held by the blacksmith Giacomo de Bargalio was sold to the merchant from Tortosa named Dominigo Albiac.[[58\]](#_ftn58) Giacomo was represented in the sale by his brother Benedetto de Bargalio, who was also a blacksmith and who had been appointed as his procurator. Another brother named Ambrogio de Bargalio was also declared as present and had vouched that Benedetto was of the age of majority and legally able to serve as the procurator for Giacomo. Similarly, in a contract from the summer of 1482, an enslaved Albanian child named Demetrio, who was only nine years of age and held by the blacksmith Leonardo de Bernardo, was sold to the nobleman Domenico Scotto. In this contract Leonardo was represented by another blacksmith Raffaele de Ben, who served as his procurator by the power of an earlier contract enacted by the notary Lorenzo de Costa and which Raffaele had presented at the enactment of the sale.[[59\]](#_ftn59) These two examples demonstrate the multiplicity of means by which artisans were participants in the market economy of slavery: in this case, blacksmiths served as sellers, procurators, and validating witnesses to the sale of enslaved persons. These sales also allowed these artisans to instantiate valuable social network ties outside their social category with foreign merchants and persons from *nobiles* families though the provision of enslaved men and women.

Although blacksmiths were the dominant profession amongst metal workers who participated in this aspect of the market economy of slavery, there were instances of other workers, such as goldsmiths, named as buyers and sellers of enslaved persons. In the summer of 1465, for example, an enslaved Bulgarian child named Margarita held by the gold beater Girolamo de Recco was sold to the Mallorcan merchant Juan Focoberto.[[60\]](#_ftn60) Margarita was only sixteen years of age and was likely the daughter of another enslaved woman held by Girolamo. Juan Focoberto was a common presence in the slave markets of fifteenth-century Genoa, and it was likely that Margarita was destined to be brought westward and exchanged again in Iberia.

Like silk workers and wool workers, the everyday presence of enslaved persons in and around the workshops of Genoese metal workers was also revealed in their statutes. The statutes of the guild of blacksmiths—the *Artes de fabris*—issued in the year 1403 specified that it was illegal for guild members to purchase any materials composed of metal—from luxury items made of gold to quotidian items like pots and pans—from enslaved individuals.[[61\]](#_ftn61) Likewise, the statutes of the guild of coopers—the *Artes calderarorium*—issued in the same year had a similar regulation in place that prohibited the purchasing of “bronze, iron, tin, lead, brass, or any other metal, either broken or whole, new or old” from enslaved persons.[[62\]](#_ftn62) Steven Epstein has also noted that metal workers were prohibited from selling used keys to enslaved individuals, reflecting similar concerns voiced by Leon Battista Alberti that the elite housewives of Florence should keep the household keys on their person at all times, lest they be stolen by, in the words of Iris Origo, their “domestic enemies”, that is, their supposedly untrustworthy household servants.[[63\]](#_ftn63)

It might seem the case that metal workers were more likely to exploit enslaved men as involuntary labourers over enslaved women because of the heavy labour associated with the workshops of their respective professions.[[64\]](#_ftn64) The vast majority of the enslaved held by these *artefices* were enslaved women, however, contrary to what one might expect. The most active metal workers in the market economy of slavery were blacksmiths, who accounted for two-thirds of sellers and all the buyers of the enslaved. Unlike other artisans, who purchased far more enslaved persons than they sold, metal workers sold almost as many enslaved persons as they purchased. This phenomenon was likely be the result of the forms of labour required in their workshops, which were far more arduous than the labour required in silk and textile shops, and which encouraged the divestment of aging individuals. This might be the case for the contract described earlier where the advanced age of the forty-year old enslaved Circassian man named Martino would have certainly been one factor that prompted the blacksmith Benedetto de Bargalio to sell him to the Catalonian merchant Domingo Albiac.[[65\]](#_ftn65) Martino was likely transported to the Iberian Peninsula immediately after the sale, where there was a strong secondary market in enslaved men who were forced into agricultural labour.[[66\]](#_ftn66) About one-third of sales made by metal workers, however, were for enslaved minors: this was an unusually large proportion. The contracts do not provide any additional information into the background of these enslaved boys and girls, or how the artisans came to be holding them, but there is a strong possibility, as mentioned above, that they were children of enslaved women held by the same artisans. It might have been beneficial, therefore, for these artisans to divest these younger and less vigorous children and purchase or hire labourers around twenty years of age who would be more able to manage the heavy labour of the workshop. In in the autumn of 1430, for example, an enslaved Russian child named Giacobo, who was approximately ten years of age and held by the blacksmith Bartolomeo de Sexto, was sold to the Mallorcan merchant Bartolomé Girones. This was one of several incursions into the Genoese market economy of slavery made by the Mallorcan merchant which reflected the strong demand for enslaved men in the Iberian Peninsula and surrounding regions.[[67\]](#_ftn67) In another example from the summer of 1435, an enslaved Russian child named Margarita, who was approximately thirteen years of age and held by the blacksmith Lodisio Goffredis, was sold the rector Pietro de Leone, who was associated with Church of San Vincenzo in Genoa.[[68\]](#_ftn68) She would have likely been made to work as a domestic servant for Pietro and perhaps perform unpaid labour for the church as well, although the contract did not provide any additional details beyond the standard legal obligations.

## 12.5 Insuring enslaved workshop labourers

Individuals from *artefices* families were largely absent from the activity of underwriting insurance on enslaved women—as illustrated in Figure 7 on page 93—apart from one contract between two relatives who were also both members of the *Artes formaiaiorum*, the guild of cheesemakers. In this contract, enacted during the autumn of 1472, an enslaved Bosnian woman Maddalena, who was approximately seven months pregnant and held by the cheese-maker Girolamo de Vineis, was insured by the underwriter Vincenzo de Vineis, who was also a cheese-maker and a member of the same albergo.[[69\]](#_ftn69) This contract not only served to recompense Girolamo should Maddalena pass away from her pregnancy but it also served to strengthen kinship ties—in this case both guild and blood kinship—between the underwriter and the slaveholder. It demonstrates the use of life insurance contracts on enslaved women as a form of mutual support among members of the same albergo and the same guild. It should also be noted that the statutes of the *Artes formaiaiorum*—much like the statutes of the silk workers guild—forbade the enslaved and formerly enslaved from guild membership, although it did allow cheesemakers to instruct them on the techniques of the craft in order to exploit them as day labourers.[[70\]](#_ftn70)

The *artefices* were considerably more active, however, as buyers of life insurance for enslaved women. These contracts provide further evidence of urban artisans holding enslaved persons as forced labourers and supplement the observations noted for sales and leasing contracts. In the spring of 1464, for example, an enslaved Russian woman named Margarita, who was four months pregnant and held by the cotton worker Teramo de Recco, was insured by the underwriter Baldassare Lomellini.[[71\]](#_ftn71) Margarita survived the childbirth and five years she would be sold by Teramo to an another individual from his albergo named Raffaele de Recco, who was an itinerant merchant with his own vessel.[[72\]](#_ftn72) There is no indication regarding the fate of the child in the later contract, but it would appear that he or she may have been retained by Teramo or some other member of his family. This forcible separation from her child would have caused much distress to Margarita, but it might have been possible to continue some form of contact given that the sale was an inter-albergo transaction. In another contract from the winter of 1460, an enslaved woman named Maria, who was five months pregnant and held by the blacksmith Antonio de Tacio, was insured by the underwriter Gaspare Spinola.[[73\]](#_ftn73) Antonio de Tacio appears to have been a minor figure in the Genoese civic world and was likely exploiting Maria as an unpaid labourer in his workshop and household. In the winter of 1453 an enslaved Circassian woman named Melica, who was approximately six months pregnant and held by the tinsmith Bartolomeo de Parma, was insured by the underwriter Basilio Axinela.[[74\]](#_ftn74) Bartolomeo de Parma was an influential person within the Genoese civic sphere—unlike the aforementioned Antonio de Tacio—having served in a number of influential administrative positions, primarily in financial sphere. In 1455 and 1457 he served on the *consilarium* of San Giorgio, the legislative body of the bank, where he would have been involved in developing bank policy and advising the *protectores*. A few years later in 1459 he was appointed to the *Officum mercantie*, another influential position that consolidated his influence in the financial sphere, resulting in his election to the *Officium protectorum Sancti Georgii* in 1461. He was also influential, although to a lesser degree, in political administration, serving on the *Officium antianorum* in 1463 and on the *Officium balie comunis Ianue* in 1467, where he wound have had a major role in dictating the scope and nature of communal expenses.[[75\]](#_ftn75) The two examples of Bartolomeo de Parma and Antonio de Tacio further illustrate that the entire range of *artefices* families—both minor and influential *artefices* families—were active participants in the slaveholding enterprise in late medieval Genoa.

A further examination of the participation of the *artefices* in the purchasing of life insurance on enslaved women illustrates that it was not only artisans from the primary manufacturing industries—that is, metal workers and textile workers—who held enslaved women, but also from several minor craft guilds. In the winter of 1465, for example, an enslaved Bulgarian woman named Maria, who was eight months pregnant and held by the shoemaker Paolo de Andoria, was insured by the underwriter Leonardo di Negro.[[76\]](#_ftn76) In another example from the spring of 1453, an enslaved woman named Lucia, who was three and a half months pregnant and held by the coral fisher Battista de Sancto Ulcixio, was insured by the underwriter Baldassare Lomellini.[[77\]](#_ftn77) Battista was very active in the market economy of slavery, having sold enslaved women on two separate occasions. The tax registers for the year 1447 record that he paid tax for the sale of an unnamed enslaved woman to Paolo Doria, and in the winter of 1456 he also sold an enslaved Russian child named Elena to the noble merchant Giacomo Cicala.[[78\]](#_ftn78) In a final example from the spring of 1460, an enslaved Circassian woman named Maddalena, who was approximately seven months pregnant and held by the apothecary Melchiorre de Varixio, was insured by the underwriter Quirico Cattaneo.[[79\]](#_ftn79) In these cases the enslaved women could have been exploited both as labourers in the workshops and as domestic servants. In the former situation they would be used to provide free workshop labour in instances where it was required, and in the latter case their exploitation as household servants would free up additional labour capacity that would have been provided otherwise by the artisan’s spouse and children.

**

The analysis of contracts from the market economy of slavery in the late medieval Genoese Mediterranean reveals that artisans were regular participants and held enslaved persons to exploit for workshop labour. This chapter demonstrates that the close and contextual reading of these notarial contracts alongside the guild statutes, as well as their aggregate analysis, can offer brief but important glimpses and insights regarding the presence of enslaved persons in urban artisanal spaces. The contracts also illustrate some of the health conditions—such as tinea capitis—experience by enslaved labourers in the workshops of blacksmiths. The presence of enslaved girls and women in the workshops of the silk industry was demonstrated by the vigorous participation of silk workers in the market economy of slavery. The contracts and statutes also illustrated the strict regulation of the enslaved within the workplace which ensured that their activities remained within the domain of general labour and that they would only be able to acquire a limited set of skills. The insurance of enslaved pregnant women held by artisans also illustrated that were not only expected to be workshop labourers but serve as household servants as well. These contracts also illustrate that these women could be subject to the same sexual abuse and exploitation by the hands of their holders as those labouring in noble households.

------

[[1\]](#_ftnref1) For the 271 persons from *artefices* families named as sellers, occupations were provided for 163 of them, or approximately 60 percent; likewise, for the 287 persons from *artefices* families named as buyers, occupations were provided for 203 of them, or approximately 69 percent.

[[2\]](#_ftnref2) These categories and associated occupations are summarized in Table 4 on page 65.

[[3\]](#_ftnref3) Steven Epstein, *Wage Labor and Guilds in Medieval Europe* (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1991), pp. 223–7.

[[4\]](#_ftnref4) Giuseppe Morazzoni, ed., *Mostra de le antiche stoffe genovesi dal secolo XV al secolo XIX* (Genova: Ente provinciale per il turismo, 1941), col. 110.

[[5\]](#_ftnref5) Domenico Gioffrè, “Il commercio d’importazione genovese alla luce dei registri del dazio, 1495–1537,” in *Studi in onore di Amintore Fanfani (nel venticinquennio di cattedra universitaria). Tomo V* (Milano: Antonio Giuffrè, 1962), pp. 183–88.

[[6\]](#_ftnref6) Osvaldo Baffico, “Contributo allo studio dei costi di trasporto: i noli della seta dal Mezzogiorno a Genova nel secolo XVI,” *Atti della società ligure di storia patria* 2ª serie, 19, no. 1 (1979), pp. 123–46.

[[7\]](#_ftnref7) Paola Massa Piergiovanni, “Technological Typologies and Economic Organisation of Silk Workers in Italy, from the XIVth to the XVIIIth Centuries,” in *Journal of European Economic History* 22, no. 3 (1993), p. 544.

[[8\]](#_ftnref8) Nicholas Terpstra, “Working the Cocoon: Gendered Charitable Enclosures and the Silk Industry in Early Modern Europe,” in *Worth and Repute: Valuing Gender in Late Medieval and Early Modern Europe. Essays in Honour of Barbara Todd*, ed. Kim Kippen and Lori Woods (Toronto: Centre for Reformation and Renaissance Studies, 2011), pp. 48–51.

[[9\]](#_ftnref9) In contracts where the buyers were named as silk workers, 57 of 59 were sales of enslaved women.

[[10\]](#_ftnref10) Maria Matilda Alexandrescu Dersca Bulgaru, “Le rôle des esclaves en Roumanie Turque au XVe siècle,” in *Byzantinische Forschungen* 11 (1987), pp. 22–3. On the importance of Bursa as a centre of silk manufacturing and node of contact and exchange for the silk merchants of Europe, the Levant, and south Asia, see Halil Inalcik, “Bursa and the Commerce of the Levant.” *Journal of the Economic and Social History of the Orient* 3, no. 2 (1960), pp. 132–6.

[[11\]](#_ftnref11) Luca Molà, *La comunità dei lucchesi a Venezia: immigrazione e industria della seta nel tardo Medioevo* (Venezia: Istituto veneto di scienze, lettere ed arti, 1994), pp. 172–3.

[[12\]](#_ftnref12) Paola Massa Piergiovanni, *L’arte genovese della seta nella normativa del XV e del XVI secolo* (Genova: Società ligure di storia patria, 1970), p. 109.

[[13\]](#_ftnref13) Raffaele di Tucci, “Lineamenti storici dell’industria serica genovese (statuti inediti del 1432),” in *Atti della società ligure di storia patria* 1ª serie, 71 (1948), p. 64.

[[14\]](#_ftnref14) BUG, Manoscritti, ms. B. II. 25, Statuti e documenti dell'Arte della seta, fol. 71r–v: “Quilibet de dicta arte possit instruere et docere quemlibet sclavum suum artem predictam, qui tamen si postea fuerit liberatus nullo tempore possit esse caporalis seu apothecarius vel gubernator alicuius apothece eiusdem artis, nec etiam possit esse consul vel consiliarius aut alius officialis artis predicte sub pena librarum centum ianuinorum totiens committenda contra talem sclavum seu liberatum quotiens per eum fuerit contrafactum. Possit tamen talis sclavus seu liberatum laborare de pertinentibus dicte artis pro suo domino vel patrono in setam sicut alii laboratores ad iornatam nonobstantibus suprascriptis.” See Tucci, “Lineamenti storici dell’industria serica genovese”, p. 64.

[[15\]](#_ftnref15) BCB, Fondo antico m.r.I.2.1, Matricola dell’Arte dei tintori, fol. 6r: “Item che ogn’uno della dett’arte possa e vaglia instruire et insegnare la dett’arte a qualsi vogli servo e schiavo suo o d’altri, quali però servi o schiavi o fatti liberi in alcun tempo non possino esser consoli o sia botegari o regere o governare alcuna botega, nè essere consoli o ufficiali o sia dare alcune voci o haverne in ellegere li consoli o ufficiali della dett’arte, o fare alcuno ufficio o benefìcio di dett’arte o essercitarlo, sotto pena de lire cento di Genova; possino però li detti servi lavorare come lavoranti a giornate.”

[[16\]](#_ftnref16) Edwin Freshfield, *Roman Law in the Later Roman Empire. Byzantine Guilds, Professional and Commercial: Ordinances of Leo VI c. 895 from the Book of the Eparch* (Cambridge: Bowesk, 1932), pp. 16–23.

[[17\]](#_ftnref17) ASGe, Notai antichi 901, Tommaso Duracino, filza 14, series II, nr. 84, dated 1471-08-08, where “nobilis Borruel Salvagus civis Ianue de Benedicti maior annoris viginti et palam et cetera sponte et ex certa scientia vendidit et titulo vendicionis dedit et consignavit Iohanni Mangaivache seaterio etiam civi Ianue quondam Nicolai... quandam sclavam dicti Borruele nominatam Margarita de progenie Burgarorum seu servorum seu alterius progeniei existat ectatis annorum viginti duorum vel circa...”

[[18\]](#_ftnref18) ASGe, Notai antichi 908, Tommaso Duracino, filza 21, nr. 498, dated 1478-09-28, where “Berthina filia quondam Oberti de Grimaldis et uxor quondam Philippi Ususmaris... vendidit et titulo vendicionis dedit tradidit et consignavit Iohannis Antonio de Costa seaterio civis Ianue quondam Bartholomei...quandam sclavam dicte Berthine nominatam Margaritam de progenie Zichorum ectatis annorum viginti vel circa...”

[[19\]](#_ftnref19) ASGe, Notai antichi 915bis, Tommaso Duracino, filza 30, nr. 20 (formerly nr. 268), dated 1495-01-31, where “Iohannes de Castilegia hyspanni de Lept Peres Stephani Matheo... vendidit dedit tradidit et consignavit Leonardo de Aznola seaterio civis Ianue Iohannis... quandam sclavam dicte Iohannis Castiligie nominatam Isabela de progenie maurorum alborum ectatis annorum vigniti unus vel circa... pro pretio et finito pretio librarum duecentarum Ianue monete currentis quas dictus Iohannes de Castilegia confessus fuit habuisse et recepisse ab ipso Leonardo in certa quantitate pannorum septe colorem viridis et nigri...”

[[20\]](#_ftnref20) An enslaved child 12 years of age, see note 31 on page 331; an enslaved woman 20 years of age, see note 17 above; an enslaved woman 20 years of age, see note 18 above.

[[21\]](#_ftnref21) Sharon Strocchia, *Nuns and Nunneries in Renaissance Florence* (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2010), pp. 118–9, where she states “nuns consigned reeling and spinning jobs to wives, widows, and girls working at home for a pittance...”

[[22\]](#_ftnref22) ASGe, Notai antichi 904, Tommaso Duracino, filza 17, nr. 237, dated 1474-03-31, where “Baptista Perolerius tintor septi civis Ianue quondam Iohannis... vendidit et titulo vendicionis dedit et consignavit Matheo Viacampis civi e mercatoris Aragonis Ianue commoranti... quandam sclavam dicte Baptiste nominatam Cita de progenie Zichorum ectatis annorum viginti sex vel circa...”

[[23\]](#_ftnref23) ASGe, Notai antichi 910, Tommaso Duracino, filza 23, series I, nr. 288, dated 1480-10-21, where “Augustinus de Facio seaterius civis Ianue de Laurentii maior annis viginti quinqe et palam... vendidit et titulo et ex causa vendiconis dedit cessit tradidit et consignavit Francisco de Amendola civis Ianue Laurentius... per se ac nomine et vice Manuelis de Amendola fratris sui... quendam sclavum dicti Augustini nominatum Theodorus de progenie Albanensium ectatis annorum sedecim vel circa...”

[[24\]](#_ftnref24) ASGe, Notai antichi 901, Tommaso Duracino, filza 14, series II, nr. 84, dated 1471-08-08. See note 17 on page 327 for details on this contract.

[[25\]](#_ftnref25) ASGe, Notai antichi 917, Giovanni Danove, filza 2, series II, nr. 266, dated 1470-12-11, where “Iohannes Mangiavacha seaterio quondam Nicolao... vendidit et titulo et ex causa venditionis dedit et consignavit nobili Lodisio de Grimaldis quondam domini Andreolis... quandam ipsius Iohannis sclavam nominatam Margarita de progenie Burgarorum sive servorum etatis annorum viginti duorum vel circa...”

[[26\]](#_ftnref26) Both sales make the exact same statement about her health: “sanam et nitidam ab presentibus viciis et magagnis oculis et manifestis secundum morem et consuetudinem civitatis Ianue.”

[[27\]](#_ftnref27) The Salvago family was very active in the port cities of the eastern Mediterranean. See Benjamin Kedar, “Segurano-Sakran Salvaygo: un mercante genovese al servizio dei sultani mammalucchi, c. 1303–1322,” in *Fatti e idee di storia economica nei secoli XII–XX: studi dedicati a Franco Borlandi* (Bologna: Il mulino, 1976), pp. 75–91; Laura Balletto, “Note e documenti sull’isola de Mitilene al tempo dei Gattilusio,” in *Οι Γατελούζοι της Λέσβου*, ed. Andréas Mazarakis (Αθήνα: Φοίνικη, 1996), p. 327; Ibid., “I genovesi e la conquista turca di Costantinopoli (1453),” *Acta historica et archaeologica mediaevalia* 26 (2005), pp. 800, 809; Geo Pistarino, *Chio dei Genovesi nel tempo di Cristoforo Colombo* (Roma: Istituto poligrafico e Zecca dello Stato, 1995), pp. 127–8.

[[28\]](#_ftnref28) Niall Atkinson, *The Noisy Renaissance: Sound, Architecture, and Florentine Urban Life* (University Park: The Pennsylvania State University Press, 2016), pp. 26–31 describes the chaotic and vibrant rhythms of the *Mercato vecchio* in Florence; Richard Goldthwaite, The Economy of Renaissance Florence (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2011), pp. 332–3, who reports an anecdote from Vasari’s biography of Botticelli about the excessive noise of silk looms, from Giorgio Vasari, *Lives of the Most Eminent Painters, Sculptors and Architects. Volume III*, trans. Gaston de Vere (London: The Medici Society, 1912), p. 252; Frances and Joseph Gies, *Cathedral, Forge, and Waterwheel: Technology and Invention in the Middle Ages* (New York: Harper Collins, 1994), pp. 263–4 where workshops in late medieval France are described as nexus of contact amongst those moving within the urban sphere.

[[29\]](#_ftnref29) ASGe, Notai antichi 901, Tommaso Duracino, filza 14, series II, nr. 84, dated 1471-08-08, with “pro pretio... librorum duocentarum septem et soldaris decem.” See note 17 on page 327 for additional details on this contract.

[[30\]](#_ftnref30) Lodisio Grimaldi was a *nobiles* merchant active in eastern Mediterranean commerce, particularly around Chios and the Greek archipelago. See Gian Giacomo Musso, “I genovesi e il Levante tra medioevo ed età moderna. Ricerche d’archivio,” in *Genova, la Liguria e l’oltremare tra Medioevo ed età moderna: studi e ricerche d’archivio. Tomo II*, ed. Raffaele Belvederi and Maria Silvia Jacopino (Genova: Fratelli Bozzi, 1976), pp. 111–2; Andrea Lercari, “Ceto dirigente e ordine di San Giovanni a Genova. Ruolo generale dei cavalieri di Malta Liguri,” in *Cavalieri di San Giovanni in Liguria e nell’Italia settentrionale. Quadri regionali, uomini e documenti*, ed. Josepha Costa Restagno (Genova: Istituto internazionale di studi liguri, 2009), p. 159; Christopher Wright, “Non ex unica natione sed ex plurimis: Genoa, the Catalans and the Knights of St. John in the Fifteenth Century,” *Mediterranea ricerche storiche* 36 (2016), p. 38.

[[31\]](#_ftnref31) ASGe, Notai antichi 907, Tommaso Duracino, filza 20, nr. 672, dated 1477-12-10, where “Iohannes Maria de Monleone faber civis Ianue quondam Eligii... vendidit et titulo et ex causa vendicionis dedit tradidit et consignavit Iohanni Mangiavache seaterio civi Ianue quondam Nicolai... quandam sclavam dicti Iohannis Marie nominatam Caterinam de progenie Maurorum alborum ectatis annorum duodecim vel circa... Et quia dicta sclava videtur in capite habere sui pati malum tinee quad circa est annum... Quad dictus Iohannes Maria teneatur ellegere quendam medicum confidentem partibus qui videat et curet dictam infirmitatem tinee... et in quantum in dictum annum unum dictus talis medicus supra elligendus per dictas partes dictam sclavam a dicto tali mali tinee non curabit, seu liberabit, tunc et eo casu presentis vendicioni non sit locus...”

[[32\]](#_ftnref32) Akash Gupta and Richard Summerbell, “Tinea Capitis,” *Medical Mycology* 38 (2000), pp. 257–64.

[[33\]](#_ftnref33) See David Crossley, “Medieval Iron Smelting” in David Crossley, ed., *Medieval Industry* (London: Council for British Archaeology, 1981), pp. 35–7, as well as the discussion on metallurgical arts later in this chapter.

[[34\]](#_ftnref34) The cleaning of raw wool required boiling large quantities of water as well as chemical treatment, whereas combing the wool required working with boiled animal fats; see Elisabeth Crowfoot, Frances Pritchard, and Kay Staniland, *Textiles and Clothing, c. 1150–c. 1450* (Rochester: Boydell Press, 2006), pp. 15–6.

[[35\]](#_ftnref35) ASGe, Notai antichi 893, Tommaso Duracino, filza 6, series I, nr. 236, dated 1461-07-23, where “Guliermus Caretia lanerius civis Ianue quondam Iohannis... vendidit et titulo et ex causa vendicionis dedit et consignavit Iohanni de Topori paterio civis Ianue quondam Rolandi... quandam sclavam dicti Guilermi nominatam Caterina de progenie Zichorum ectatis annorum viginti sex vel circa...”

[[36\]](#_ftnref36) ASGe, Notai antichi 894, Tommaso Duracino, filza 7, series II, nr. 315, dated 1464-11-09, where “Iohannes Molinarius olim burgensis Peyre habitator Ianue quondam Petri... vendidit et titulo et ex causa vendicione dedit et consignavit Baptiste Berlende magistro tintoris quondam Francesci habitatoris Varaginis... quandam sclavam ipsius Iohannis nominatam Elena de progenie Burgarorum ectatis annorum decimo octo vel circa...”

[[37\]](#_ftnref37) ASGe, Notai antichi 912, Tommaso Duracino, filza 25, series II, nr. 272, dated 1485-09-12, where “Franchiscus de Saulo draperius civis Ianue quondam Luce vendidit et titulo vendicionis dedit tradidit et consignavit nobili Christoforo Centurione civi Ianue quondam Iohannis presenti stipulanti et recipenti pro se et heredibus suis quandam sclavam dicti Franchischi Fatema de progenie Teuchorum ectatis annorum viginta vel circa...”

[[38\]](#_ftnref38) ASGe, Notai antichi 587, Antonio Fazio, filza 13, series I, nr. 202, dated 1448-09-24, where “Simon de Vigenio negiarius in Ianue sponte et ex sua certa scientia... vendidit et titulo vendicionis dedit cessit tradidit et mandavit seu quasi Petro de Opertis filatori septe in Ianue... quandam sclavam ipsius Simonis vocatam Caterina ectatis annorum viginti vel circa de progenie Tartarorum...”

[[39\]](#_ftnref39) Luigi Tommaso Belgrano, Cornelio Desimoni, and Vittorio Poggi, eds., *Leges genuenses* (Torino: Officium Regia, 1901), col. 714: “...ordinamus quod aliquis paterius per se vel per alium non emat vel emere presumat aliquas res vel vestes ab aliquo sclavo, rumentario, vel ab aliquibus famulis alicuius civis vel habitatoris Ianue, vel ab alia persona male vel inhoneste fame, pro aliquo precio, sub pena reddendi et restituendi tales res dominis quorum fuerint, et perditionis earumdem.”

[[40\]](#_ftnref40) Steven Epstein, *Speaking of Slavery: Color, Ethnicity, and Human Bondage in Italy* (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 2001), pp. 125–6.

[[41\]](#_ftnref41) Eugene Genovese, *Roll, Jordan, Roll: The World the Slaves Made* (New York: Vintage Books, 1976), p. 598. Genovese is following the earlier argument put forth in Kenneth Stampp, *The Peculiar Institution: Slavery in the Ante-Bellum South* (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1965), p. 125, who argued that theft by the enslaved represented the formulation of their own legal and moral codes against those of the slaveholders who held them in unjust bondage. For a more nuanced interpretation of this phenomenon in the language of moral economy, see Alex Lichtenstein, “That disposition to theft, with which they have been branded: moral economy, slave management, and the law,” *Journal of Social History* 21, no. 3 (1988), pp. 413–40.

[[42\]](#_ftnref42) ASGe, Notai antichi 1170, Giovanni de Benedetti, filza 2, item dated 1485-05-14, apprenticeship contract for “Iohannes de Serventi de Turricc de Varixio Simnois” where “Petrus de Clavaro Leonis” was named as the master; ASGe, Notai antichi 1173, Giovanni de Benedetti, filza 5, item dated 1486-03-17, apprenticeship contract for “Agostinus de Varixio Baptiste” where “Pantaleone de Clavaro Stephani lanerius” was a witness. See also ASGe, Notai antichi 1315, Antonio Pastorino, filza 25, nr. 302, dated 1506-04-07, sale by “Pantaleon de Clavaro quondam Stephani lanerius” where he was represented by his brothers Giovanni Battista, Vincenzo, and Matteo de Clavaro. These contracts were sourced through the ARTIGEN database developed and maintained by the Dipartimento di Antichità, Filosofia e Storia at the Università di Genova; see Oscar Itzcovich, “ARTIGEN: An Oracle Database for Mass Prosopography. Nominal Record Linkage and Kinship Network Reconstruction,” in *L’ordinateur et le métier d’historien* (Bordeaux: Maison de Pays Ibériques, 1999), pp. 86–96.

[[43\]](#_ftnref43) BCB, Fondo antico m.r.Cf.Arm.26, Lettere del virtuosissimo Giacomo Bracelli cancelliere, fols. 401–402: “Clavarum oppidum tam pulchrum quam superbum: in quo alter vicarius ripariae orientis Ianue residet: ius reddens plusquam hominibus quinque milibus quingentis: pulchro muro et forti circundatur: bona arce tutum et plurimis turribus decoratum in muri circulo et iuxta littus maris, abundat vino oleo castaneis et frugibus diversis lignaminibus, habitatores vero qui sunt in muro sunt divites mercaturam agentes distat a Lavania permiliare tantum...”; see partial edition in Giuseppe Andriani, “Giacomo Bracelli nella storia della geografia,” *Atti della società ligure di storia patria* 1ª serie, 52 (1924), doc. 5, p. 246; see also Daniela Galassi, “La Riviera di Levante,” in *La Liguria e Genova al tempo di Colombo*, ed. Gaetano Ferro (Roma: Istituto poligrafico e Zecca dello Stato, 1988), pp. 173–4.

[[44\]](#_ftnref44) Anselmo Adorno, *Itinéraire d’Anselme Adorno en Terre Sainte (1470–1471)*, ed. Georgette de Groer and Jacques Heers (Paris: Éditions du Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, 1978), p. 452: “Et eodem die venimus in prandio in Schavari, latine Clavarum vocitatum novi nominis, ut dicunt, oppidum quia ante centum et quinquaginta annos nondum menibus cinctum erat sed nunc a maritimis et montams populis fori et jurisdictionis conventus ibidem habentur et sic est oppidum satis insigne et populatum frequentatum...”

[[45\]](#_ftnref45) Fernand Braudel, *Civilization and Capitalism, 15th–18th Century. Volume II: The Wheels of Commerce* (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1981), pp. 316–20.

[[46\]](#_ftnref46) ASGe, Notai antichi 1170, Giovanni de Benedetti, filza 2, item dated 1481-06-02, apprenticeship contract for “Iohannetinus de Iambrunis Franchesci”; Ibid., item dated 1485-05-05, for “Iohannetinus de Parma Gaspari”, Ibid, item dated 1486-01-13: for “Baptista de Lansula de Borgono Domenici”; Ibid., item dated 1486-08-26, for “Antonius Manuserii de Viola de Ceva Baptiste”; ASGe, Notai antichi 1171, Giovanni de Benedetti, filza 3, item dated 1487-04-27, apprenticeship contract for “Beneditus de Montepioentio de Zoalio Bartholomei”; ASGe, Notai antichi 1172, Giovanni de Benedetti, filza 4, item dated 1492-05-17, apprenticeship contract for “Batistinus de Carro Gulielmi”; Ibid., item dated 1453-01-25, for “Antonius de Balestrino de Sexto Bartholomei”; Ibid., item dated 1494-11-26, for “Andrea de Canestro de Savignono Petri”; ASGe, Notai antichi 1173, Giovanni de Benedetti, filza 5, item dated 1496-05-05, apprenticeship contract for “Pasqualinus de Barrano de Castiliono Iohani Antonii.” These contracts were sourced through the ARTIGEN database, see note 42 on page 334 for details.

[[47\]](#_ftnref47) ASGe, Notai antichi 990, Lorenzo Costa, filza 4, nr. 880, dated 1471-11-11, where “Venerabiles sororer Brigida et Baptistina de Spinulis moniales in monasterio monialium sancte Barnabe extra muros civitatis Ianue, et ad cautelam in presentia cum consensuamentu et voluntate infrascriptarum dominarum, abbatisse et monialium dicti monasterii... vendiderunt et titulo et ex causa venditionis dederunt cesserunt traddiderunt et mandaverunt seu quasi Stephano de Clavaro filio Leonis... quamdam ipsarum sororum Brigide et Baptistine sclavam vocatam Ellenam etatis annorun triginta trium in circa de progenie Ungarorum ut asserit...”

[[48\]](#_ftnref48) ASGe, Notai antichi 901, Tommaso Duracino, filza 14, series II, nr. 411 (formerly nr. 318), dated 1471-12-18, where “Franciscus Cataneus civis Ianue quondam Franchi vendidit et titulo et ex causa vendicionis dedit tradidit et consignavit Stephano de Clavaro civis Ianue Leonis... quandam sclavam dicti Francesci nominatam Magdalena de progenie Tartarorum, ectatis annorum triginta quinque vel circa...”

[[49\]](#_ftnref49) ASGe, Notai antichi 904, Tommaso Duracino, filza 17, nr. 162, dated 1474-03-04, where “nobilis Georgius Lomelinus... vendidit et titulo vendicionis dedit et consignavit Stephano de Clavaro Leonis lanerio... quandam sclavam ipsius Georgii nominatam Magdalena de progenie Maurorum, ectatis annorum viginti vel circa...”

[[50\]](#_ftnref50) ASGe, Notai antichi 1248, Martino Brignole, filza 4, nr. 315, item dated 1487-06-03, where “heredes quondam Anfreonus Squarziaficus... vendidit et titulo venditionis dedit et consignavit Stephano de Clavaro lanerio... quandam sclavam... nominatam Luciam de progenie Zichorum...”

[[51\]](#_ftnref51) ASGe, Notai antichi 1248, Martino Brignole, filza 4, nr. 88, dated 1487-02-27, where “Stephano de Clavaro lanerius... vendidit et titulo venditionis dedit et consignavit Angelo de Miardo... quandam sclavam ipsius Stephani nominatam Caterinam de progenie Tartarorum etatis annorum duodecim in circa..”

[[52\]](#_ftnref52) ASGe, Notai antichi 544, Pietro de Albertis, filza 1, item dated 1408-08-30, “item sclavum unum de progenie Tartarorum, qui est annorum vigenti vel circa...” Edition in Alfonso Assini and Vito Piergiovanni, eds., “Catalogo della mostra documentaria Hinc publica fides” in *Hinc publica fides: il notaio e l’amministrazione della giustizia* (Milano: Antonio Giuffrè, 2006), doc. 32, pp. 453–5.

[[53\]](#_ftnref53) ASGe, Notai antichi 595, Antonio Fazio, filza 21, nr. 18, dated 1423-01-12, where “Bartholomeus et Dexerinus cives Ianue quondam Iohanni... vendidit et titulo vendicionis dedit cessit tradidit et mandavit seu quasi Iohanni de Toirano... quemdam sclavum dicti Iohannis de Toirano nominatum Martinus de progenie Rubeorum etatis annorum XXXIII in circa...”

[[54\]](#_ftnref54) The determination of the regional provenance of an enslaved person was often merely an educated guess. In particular, persons from the lands inhabited by Tatars and Russians were often conflated. See page 88 for a description of the fluidity of identifying the regional origins of enslaved persons from the Black Sea.

[[55\]](#_ftnref55) Toirano is a village about 70 km west of Genoa, in the province of Savona. On the wool industry in Toirano during the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, see Angelo Nicolini, “Produzione e commercio dei panni di lana a Savona fra Tre e Quattrocento,” *Atti e memorie della società savonese di storia patria* 2ª serie, 42 (2006), pp. 5–64.

[[56\]](#_ftnref56) See Gies and Gies, *Cathedral, Forge, and Waterwheel*, pp. 62–6 which describes what must have been the incredibly hot and somewhat dangerous environment of the workshop of a medieval blacksmith.

[[57\]](#_ftnref57) Crossley, “Medieval Iron Smelting”, pp. 35–7. The temperature required to melt iron, for example, exceeded 1200°C.

[[58\]](#_ftnref58) ASGe, Notai antichi 889, Tommaso Duracino, filza 2, series II, nr. 36, dated 1456-02-03, where “Benedictus de Bargalio faber civis Ianue Ambroxii maior annis XXV et palam et publice negocians et faciens facta sua sciente et paciente dicto Ambroxio eius fratris ut sponte aserit et afirmat idem Benedictus tanquam procurator et procuratorio nomine ut aserit Iacobi de Bargalio fratris sui et a quo Iacobo ipse Benedictus aserit habere plenum et suficiens mandatum potestatem et bayliam... vendidit et titulo et ex causa vendicionis dedit cessit tradidit et consignavit Domenico Albiac de Turtuxia filio Domenici presenti stipulanti et recipienti ac ementi pro se et heredibus et successoribus suis quendam sclavum dicti Iacobi fratris sui nominatum Martinus de progenie Zichorum sive cuiusvis alterius progeniei existat ectatis annorum quadraginta in circa...”

[[59\]](#_ftnref59) ASGe, Notai antichi 911, Tommaso Duracino, filza 24, series I, nr. 293, dated 1482-06-21, where “Raphael de Ben faber civis Ianue Iohannis tamquam procurator et procuratorio nomine ut aserit Leonardi de Bernardo fabri et a quo Leonardi ipse Raphael aserit habere potestatem et baliam... vigore instrumenti scripti manu Laurentii de Costa notarii... vendidit et titulo et ex causa vendicionis dedit tradidit et consignavit Domenico Scote habitatori Ianue quondam Tome... quendam sclavum dicti Leonardi nominatum Demetrius ectatis annorum nonem vel circa de progenie Albanensium...”

[[60\]](#_ftnref60) ASGe, Notai antichi 895, Tommaso Duracino, filza 8, nr. 484, dated 1465-09-04, where “Ieronimus de Recho batifolius civis Ianue quondam Raphaeli vendidit et titulo et ex causa vendicionis dedit et consignavi Iohanni Fontecoberto civi et mercatoris Maioricari Ianue commoranti... quandam sclavam dicti Ieronimi nomintatam Margarita de progenie Burgarorum ectatis annorum sexdecim vel circa...”

[[61\]](#_ftnref61) Belgrano *et al*, eds., Leges genuenses, col. 674: “...ordinamus quod aliquis faber sive aurifex civitatis Ianue vel aliqua alia persona non possit vel debeat emere vel aliquo titulo acquirere aliquam quantitatem frisiorum trenetarum argenti perlarum veracium vel argentearum lapidum preciosorum vel auri ab aliquo sclavo vel famulo maribus vel femminis...”

[[62\]](#_ftnref62) Belgrano *et al*, eds., Leges genuenses, col. 713: “...ordinamus quod aliquis calderarius, clapucius vel aliqua persona ex dictis artibus vel aliqua earum non audeat vel presumat emere vel acquirere, aliquo modo vel ingenio, ab aliquo sclavo, sclava vel rumentario, vel ab alia persona consimili, ramum, ferrum, stagnum, plombum, bronzimi, latonum, vel aliquod aliud metallum, vel aliam rem novam aut veterem integram sive fractam...”

[[63\]](#_ftnref63) Leone Battista Alberti, *I libri della famiglia*, ed. Francesco Furlan, Ruggiero Romano, and Alberto Tenenti (Torino: Giulio Einaudi, 1994), p. 251; Id., *The Family in Renaissance Florence*, trans. Renée Neu Watkins (Columbia: University of South Carolina Press, 1969), pp. 223–4; Epstein, *Speaking of Slavery*, p. 97; Origo, “The Domestic Enemy”, p. 342.

[[64\]](#_ftnref64) This is the view expressed by Michel Balard for enslaved men in thirteenth century Genoa; see “Remarques sur les esclaves à Gênes dans la seconde moitié du XIIIe siècle,” *Mélanges d’archéologie et d’histoire* 80 (1968), p. 652.

[[65\]](#_ftnref65) ASGe, Notai antichi 889, Tommaso Duracino, filza 2, series II, nr. 36, dated 1456-02-03, see details of this contract in note 58 on page 338.

[[66\]](#_ftnref66) On the use of enslaved men for agricultural work in fifteenth century Iberia, see Debra Blumenthal, *Enemies and Familiars: Slavery and Mastery in Fifteenth Century Valencia* (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 2009), pp. 95–101.

[[67\]](#_ftnref67) ASGe, Notai antichi 648, Branca Bagnara, filza 1, series II, nr. 273, dated 1430-10-04 where “Bartholomeus de Sexto civis Ianue... vendidit et titulo et ex causa vendicionis dedit et tradidit Bartolomeo Girones de Maioricis... quandam sclavam ipsius Bartholomei vocatam Iacobinus de progenie Rubeorum etatis annorum decem vel circa...” See Silvana Fossati Raiteri, “Presenze genovesi a Siviglia nella seconda metà del Quattrocento,” *Anuario de estudios medievales* 24 (1994), pp. 299–312; Isidoro González Gallego, “El libro de los privilegios de la nación genovesa,” *Historia, instituciones, documentos* 1 (1974), pp. 275–358 for additional analyses of Iberian merchants purchasing enslaved persons from Genoese merchants.

[[68\]](#_ftnref68) ASGe, Notai antichi 578, Antonio Fazio, filza 4, series I, nr. 205, dated 1435-07-15, sale by “Lodixius Iofredus de Sancto Romulo faber civis Ianue sponte vendidit et titulo vendicionis dedit cessit traddidit mandavit seu quasi domino fratri Petro de Leono rectori ecclesie Sancti Vincentii de Ianua... quandam sclavam dicti Lodixii vocatam Margarita etatis annorum quindecim in circa de progenie Rubeorum...” San Vincenzo was the parish church for the contrade of San Vincenzo, in the compagna of Porta, inhabited primarily by *artefices*. It was deconsecrated in the nineteenth century. See ASCGe, Manoscritti 23, Origine e successi delle chiese, monasterii e luoghi pii della città e riviere di Genova, fols. 655r–656v; Luciano Grossi Bianchi and Ennio Poleggi, *Una città portuale del medioevo: Genova nei secoli X–XVI* (Genova: SAGEP, 1987), pp. 183–4.

[[69\]](#_ftnref69) ASGe, Notai antichi 902, Tommaso Duracino, filza 15, nr. 607, dated 1472-11-03: “Vincentius de Vineis formaiarus quondam Raphael... recognovit Ieronimo de Vineis etiam formaiaro quondam Lanfranchi... habuisse et recepisse tantam quantitatem suarum rerum et mercium bonarum et mercantilium causa infrascripta... cum effectu hinc ad menses quatuor proxime venturos libras ducentas quinquaginta Ianuinorum monete currentis... si quedam sclava... nominata Magdalena de progenie Bossinorum ectatis annorum viginti unius vel circa nunc gravida seu pregnans mensium septem vel circa, de partu suo et de dicta eius pregnacione... salva et viva evaserit tunc et eo casu presens instrumentum sit cassum irritum et nullum...”

[[70\]](#_ftnref70) Calleri, Nicola. “I capitoli dell’arte dei formaggiai.” *La Berio* 31 (1991), pp. 23–4. See page 313 for the discussion on the statutes of the silk guild.

[[71\]](#_ftnref71) ASGe, Notai antichi 894, Tommaso Duracino, filza 7, series II, nr. 98, dated 1464-05-11, where “Baldasar Lomelinus civis Ianue quondam Stephani... recognovit et recognoscit... Therami de Recho bambaxarii Nicolai... habuisse et recepisse tantam quantitatem ipsarum rerum mercium bonarum mercantilium... cum effectu hinc ad menses septem proxime venturos libras ducentas viginti quinque Ianuinorum monete currentis... si quedam sclava dicti Therami nominata Margarita de progenie Rubeorum ectatis annorum viginti vel circa gravida seu pregnans mensis quatuor vel circa de partu suo et de dicta eius gravidacione... salva et viva evaserit quod tunc et eo casu presens instrumentum sit cassum irritum et nullum...”

[[72\]](#_ftnref72) ASGe, Notai antichi 878, Giacomo Rondanina, filza 5, series I, nr. 219, dated 1469-06-15; see description in Gioffrè, *Il mercato degli schiavi a Genova*, p. 228. On Raffaele de Recco as patron of his own ship, see ASGe, San Giorgio 36916, Galearum Sancti Georgii 1487, fol. 3r.

[[73\]](#_ftnref73) ASGe, Notai antichi 892, Tommaso Duracino, filza 5, nr. 50 (formerly nr. 365), dated 1460-01-24: “Gaspar Spinula civis Ianue quondam Baptiste... Antonii de Tacio fabri civis Ianue... emisse habuisse et recepisse tantam quantitatem suarum rerum mercium bonarum et mercantilium... cum effectu hinc ad menses quatuor proxime venturos libras centum octuaginta Ianuinorum monete currentis... si quedam sclava... nominata Maria ectatis annorum viginti quinque vel circa, gravida mensis septem vel circa, de partu suo et de dicta eius gravidacione... viva evaserit quod tunc et eo casu presens instrumentum sit casum irritum et nullum...”

[[74\]](#_ftnref74) ASGe, Notai antichi 888, Tommaso Duracino, filza 1, series I, nr. 17, dated 1453-02-06: “Baxilius Axinela civis Ianue sponte et ex sui certa scientia confessus fuit et in veritate publice recognovit et recognoscit... Bartholomei de Parma stagnarii... habuisse et recepisse tantam quantitatem suarum rerum et mercium bonarum et mercantilium... cum effectu hinc ad menses quinque proxime venturos libras centum quinquaginta... si quedam sclava... vocata Melicha de progenie Iharchasiorum ectatis annorum viginti octo vel circa, que est ad presentis pregnans seu gravida menses sex in circa, de partu suo et dicta eius pregnatione... salva et viva evaserit tunc et eo casu presens instrumentum sit cassum irritum et nullum...”

[[75\]](#_ftnref75) ASCGe, Manoscritti 441, Memorie della città di Genova e di tutto il suo dominio 1437–1464, fols. 250v, 271r; ASCGe, Manoscritti 52, Famiglie popolari genovesi, fol. 484v; ASCGe, Manoscritti 442, Memorie della città di Genova e di tutto il suo dominio 1465–1493, fol. 30v.

[[76\]](#_ftnref76) ASGe, Notai antichi 895, Tommaso Duracino, filza 8, nr. 6, dated 1465-01-01, where “Leonardus de Nigro civis Ianue quondam Augusti... recognovit et recognoscit... Pauli de Andoria calsolarii... emisse habuisse et recepisse tantam quantitatem suarum rerum et mercium bonarum et mercantilium... cum effectu hinc ad menses tres proxime venturos libras centum Ianuinorum monete currentis... si quedam sclava dicti Pauli... nominata Maria de progenie Burgarorum ectatis annorum viginti quinque vel circa gravida seu pregnans menisum octo vel circa de partu suo et de dicta eius gravidacione pregnacione et partu... viva evaserit quod tunc et eo casu presens instrumentum sit cassum irritum et nullum...”

[[77\]](#_ftnref77) ASGe, Notai antichi 890, Tommaso Duracino, filza 3, series I, nr. 188, dated 1457-06-21, where “Baldasar Lomelinus civis Ianue domini Stephani... confessus fuit et confitetur in veritate publice recognovit et recognoscit Baptiste de Sancto Ulcixio civi Ianue quondam Petri... habuisse et recepisse tantam quantitatem suarum rereum et mercium bonarum et mercantilium... hinc ad menses tres cum dimidio florenos centum Ianuinorum monete currentis... si quedam sclava... nominata Lucia ectatis annorum decemocto vel circa nunc gravida seu pregnans mensium septem cum dimidio vel circa de partu suo et de dicta eius gravidacione et partu... viva evaserit quod tunc et eo casu presens instrumentum sit casum irritum et nullum...”

[[78\]](#_ftnref78) ASGe, Notai antichi 720, Bartolomeo Risso, filza 6, nr. 330 (formerly nr. 331), dated 1456-01-28; see the brief description of this contract and the indication from the *cabella sclavorum* tax register in Gioffrè, *Il mercato degli schiavi a Genova nel secolo XV, pp. 220* and *321.* The slaveholder Battista de Sancto Ulcixio was also named as a member of the guild of coral fishers in 1477. See Onorato Pastine, “L’arte de corallieri nell’ordinamento delle corporazione genovese (secoli XV–XVIII),” *Atti della società ligure di storia patria* 1ª serie, 61 (1933), pp. 285–6.

[[79\]](#_ftnref79) ASGe, Notai antichi 892, Tommaso Duracino, filza 5, nr. 235 (formerly nr. 470), dated 1460-05-12, where “Quilicus Cattaneus civis Ianue quondam Franci... recognovit et recognoscit... Melchionis de Varixio speciarii... habuisse et recepisse tantam quantitatem suarum rerum et mercium bonarum et mercantilium... hinc ad menses tres proxime venturos libras centum vigintiquinque Ianuinorum monete currentis... si quedam sclava dicti Melchionis nominata Magdalena de progenie Zichorum ectatis annorum viginti novem vel circa nunc gravida seu pregnans mensium octo vel circa de partu suo et de dicta eius gravidacione et pregnacione... salva et viva evaserit quod tunc et eo casu... presens instrumentum sit cassum irritum et nullum...”