# Chapter 13 Enslaved persons in sacred spaces: slaveholding and ecclesiastical service in the Genoese Mediterranean

The regular appearance of religious men and women in sales contracts represented another means by which women had engaged in the market economy of slavery. Their active participation in this endeavour should serve to counter any lingering notion that the socioeconomic practices of enslavement were not compatible with the religious practices of the late medieval Christian Church. The contemporaneous nature of the two phenomena should also challenge the historical interpretation that Mediterranean slavery was a more benign and humane version of exploitation, one in which the enslaved were unambiguously human and “on the right side of the dividing line... between animality and humanity.”[[1\]](#_ftn1) This chapter will take a brief look at some of the interventions into the market economy of slavery made by men and women from late medieval Genoese religious institutions. It will also examine the emerging phenomenon of redemption in the Genoese Mediterranean by examining the actions of one of its early practitioners: the Archbishop of Chios named Girolamo de Camulio.

## 13.1 Slaveholders from religious institutions

There were several contracts recording the sale and purchase of enslaved persons by slaveholders representing religious institutions. The analysis of Chapter 4 shows that religious men and women represented a small but significant part of the market economy of slavery. These contracts were generally related to the exchange of enslaved women: there were very few contracts in which religious men and women were named in relation to the exchange of enslaved men. In the summer of 1428, for example, the merchant Tobia Lomellini sold an enslaved Russian child named Lucia to Maria Maruffo, a nun of the convent of San Bartolomeo del Fossato.[[2\]](#_ftn2) Maria was only sixteen years of age at the time of sale and she would have likely been forced to work as a domestic servant in the monastery. It is not certain whether she would have entered the religious order after some time or remained a servant, but the appearance of enslaved women held by monasteries in insurance contracts suggests the latter.

The willingness of religious women to enter the market economy of slavery as sellers—that is, willing to hand over enslaved women under their protection to buyers to exploit as they see fit—should finally belie any speculation that their participation was somehow benevolent and intended to provide some form of safe refuge for the enslaved. In the autumn of 1471, for example, an enslaved Hungarian woman named Elena, who was held by Brigida and Battistina Spinola, nuns from the monastery of Santa Barnaba, was sold to the merchant Stefano de Clavaro.[[3\]](#_ftn3) At the time Elena was thirty-three years of age and sold without conditions, and it is difficult not to take the slightly caustic view of her divestment as a purely economic transaction designed to raise capital for the monastery while she was still relatively young and before old age would begin to limit her capacity for manual labour. It may also have been the case that the sale was the result of some form of subordination by Elena.

There were many instances where nuns from the monastery of Santo Sepolcro di Sampierdarena participated in the market economy of slavery. In the summer of 1450, the abbess Argenta Salvago was named in a quittance regarding the purchase of an enslaved woman from the nobleman Bartolomeo Doria.[[4\]](#_ftn4) A few years later, in the winter of 1457, an enslaved woman named Margarita held by the nun Costanza Spinola was sold to the merchant Antonio Casanova.[[5\]](#_ftn5) This religious institution was also an active participant in the leasing market of enslaved persons during the period of this study. In the autumn of 1394, for example, an enslaved woman named Margarita, who had been held by the recently deceased Agostino de Mari, was purchased by the procurator Cristoforo Spinola, who was acting on behalf of the monastery, an at a public auction in Genoa. Agostino was a merchant from a *nobiles* family that were active in the market economies of slavery and held strong social ties to the commercial cities of the eastern Mediterranean. Giustina Olgiati notes that his relative Raffaele de Mari had strong connections in the Levantine slaving zone, having married into a wealthy Syrian family in 1369 for which he received a very substantial dowry of 1000 Genoese lire. Agostino was one of three relatives entrusted in supervising the inventory of the assets of Raffaele upon his death a decade after the marriage—an inventory that also included two enslaved women.[[6\]](#_ftn6) He appears to be an itinerant merchant with his own ship, and was active in Famagusta in the late fourteenth century, an important slaving zone for Genoese merchants.[[7\]](#_ftn7) Margarita was taken to the monastery, located west of Genoa in the region of Sampierdarena, during the winter of 1396, where she remained until the nuns fled to escape the civil unrest and violence taking place in the countryside between various political factions vying to control Genoa.[[8\]](#_ftn8) The members of the order took refuge in several homes belonging to the Salvago family in Genoa and had subsequently brought Margarita with them. In a contract enacted in the home of the lawyer Evangelista Salvago soon after her arrival, Margarita was leased out by the abbess of the monastery Tommasina Gentile to the Genoese wool worker Giovanni Riccio for a term of six years.[[9\]](#_ftn9) Giovanni was an active participant in the market economy of slavery, having already held an enslaved man who laboured in his workshop.[[10\]](#_ftn10) His lease of Margarita was likely for a similar purpose. The lease allowed the nuns to profit from their holding of Margarita without the worry of having to house her during their exile from the monastery, and furthermore, they would receive her back form Giovanni after the tumult in the countryside had subsided. This was not the only instance in which this monastery participated in this aspect of the market economies of slavery. Several decades later, in the summer of 1449, an Abkhazan woman named Lucia held by the monastery would be leased to the merchant Bartolomeo Doria for a period of thirteen years.[[11\]](#_ftn11)

The leasing of enslaved persons was one of the most common means through which religious institutions participated in the market economy of slavery. In the autumn of 1449, for example, an enslaved Greek woman named Lucia held by Giacomo de Passano was leased out an to the priest Antonio de Boiano for a period of ten years.[[12\]](#_ftn12) Antonio was an inhabitant of the commune of Bargone and most likely served as the priest at the Church of San Martino, which was the only church in the town.[[13\]](#_ftn13) The contract did not specify how Lucia was to serve Antonio, but it is likely that she served a double role: as a household servant as well as a servant within the church. In another contract from the autumn of 1487, an enslaved Hungarian woman named Maria, who had been held by the recently deceased Raffaele Doria, was leased to the monk Alessandro Ravascherio, who was the abbot of the Benedictine monastery of San Andrea di Borzone, for a period of nine years.[[14\]](#_ftn14) Like many Genoese nobles, Raffaele had made several previous incursions into the market economy of slavery. In the winter of 1468 he was named in a contract for the sale of an enslaved Abkhazan woman, also named Maria, to the Valencian merchant Gabriele Marco.[[15\]](#_ftn15) Some years later, in the autumn of 1458, he was named in another contract for the lease of an enslaved Albanian woman, again named Maria, to the merchant Niccolò Piccamiglio.[[16\]](#_ftn16) In this second case his death led the notary Battista de Palodio, who was the procurator for his goods, to lease out Maria on the command of the heirs of Raffaele. It seems that these heirs—his sons Pietro and Giovanni Francesco—were not prepared to accept her into their service, since they were still minors at the time whose mothers had also passed away. It appears that were they were also not prepared to free her—or perhaps neither able nor willing to free her—as was sometimes the case when a slaveholder died.[[17\]](#_ftn17) Instead, they sent her out to the monastery for an extended period where she would have likely been forced to perform menial household services for the monks cloistered there. The notary did not record the age of Maria, but it appears that she was leased for a term of sufficient length so that she could continue to serve either Pietro or Giovanni Francesco upon her return from the monastery, and so she was probably quite young. As mentioned earlier, the named receiver in the contract was Alessandro Ravascherio, who served as the abbot of the monastery, located in the village of Borzone in the mountainous region of Val di Vara, located about 50 km east of Genoa. He was often present within the city of Genoa, conducting business and making investments, taking part in clerical councils, and advocating for fiscal exemptions on behalf of his monastery. He would have been familiar, therefore, with the market economies of slavery and how they could be exploited to provide another means to accumulate financial capital for his institution.[[18\]](#_ftn18) There is no further record of Maria and modern studies of the monastery do not make mention of any enslaved individuals. The historical participation of religious institutions in the market economies of slavery is a field that has yet to be satisfactorily explored.

The participation of religious institutions in the insurance of the pregnant enslaved women which they held and for whom they were the legal owners served to further widen the gap between Christian idealism and stark socioeconomic realities. This form of insurance contract, as discussed in Chapter 7, was specifically designed to conceal the practice of usury by representing the act of underwriting as a fictional sale. In the summer of 1459, an enslaved Russian woman named Lucia, held by Argenta Salvago, the abbess of the Cistercian monastery of Santo Sepolcro di Sampierdarena, was insured by the underwriter Merualdo Grimaldi against the risk of death at childbirth.[[19\]](#_ftn19) The contract named Argenta as the slaveholder of Lucia, who had been pregnant for approximately four months. The abbess Argenta swore through her procurator “in the name of the Lord” that she had provided the insurer Merualdo with a quantity of merchandise and goods, for which he would pay her one hundred and seventy lire in seven months’ time. It might be claimed that Argenta did not understand the nature of the contract as a means of avoiding usury, but as abbess she would have had considerable experience managing operations and finances for a relatively large and complex organization, so this seems very unlikely.[[20\]](#_ftn20) Perhaps Merualdo had insured the pregnant Lucia without accepting a premium, thereby freeing both transactors from any guild of participating in usury? The contract did explicitly state, however, that Merualdo had received some form of capital payment from Argenta, and the abbess swore to have provided that payment. If no premium had been exchanged, then this explanation would raise suspicions in the modern scholar regarding her truthfulness under oath. In any case, the participation of religious orders in insuring the enslaved reflects the increasing socioeconomic reality of late medieval Genoa: it was a society comfortable with and accepting of the idea of enslavement.

In an insurance contract from the winter of 1457, an enslaved woman named Anastasia, probably a Tatar or Circassian given her name and the predominance of enslaved women from these regions in the mid-fifteenth century, held by Isolta Interiano, a Benedictine nun from the convent of Sant’Andrea, was insured against the risk of death though childbirth.[[21\]](#_ftn21) The term of the contract was stated as “always with effect according to the free will and request of the Isolta” which represented a marked divergence from the remainder of life insurance contracts which had fixed and limited terms between one to nine months.[[22\]](#_ftn22) It is not clear why this particular contract had an open ended term. Perhaps Isolta thought that this would protect her from indirectly participating in usurious activity. Another interpretation might be that Isolta expected Anastasia to become pregnant again at some future date and that this contract might apply in that case as well. Neither interpretation reflects well on the activities and motivations of Isolta. The contract raises the intriguing question of how Anastasia became pregnant in the first place, the extent of sexual abuse in the monastery, and what would become of her unborn child. In another example from the winter of 1458 an enslaved woman named Maria, who was approximately five months pregnant and held by the Francesca de Marco, the abbess of the Benedictine monastery of Santa Maria di Pietraminuta, was insured by the underwriter Goffredo Lercari.[[23\]](#_ftn23) These insurance purchases show that monastic orders had few qualms about the morality of holding enslaved women within their institutions.[[24\]](#_ftn24) The contracts also imply that enslaved women in these monastic orders might be particularly vulnerable to sexual exploitation. The leasing of these enslaved women after they had given birth to serve as wet nurses also provided an additional means by which the monastery could accumulate financial capital. The enterprise of slavery had clearly been firmly embedded in all facets of Genoese life, even in the most sanctified of locations. Additional archival research needs to be conducted to determine the roles of enslaved men and women in monastic environments and the nature and extent of sexual exploitation they may have faced.[[25\]](#_ftn25)

Table 13 identifies some men and women serving religious institutions—such as convents and monasteries—as well as clergy employed by various churches who were denoted as slaveholders in the late medieval Genoese Mediterranean.

Table 13: Slaveholders from churches and monasteries in the Genoese market economy of slavery

| Date       | Participant            | Role        | Institution                                 |
| ---------- | ---------------------- | ----------- | ------------------------------------------- |
| 1383-04-14 | Orietta di Negro       | monaca      | San Colombano in Bobbio                     |
| 1396-01-28 | ---                    | monaca      | Santo Sepolcro in Sampierdarena             |
| 1406-10-20 | Giovanni de Portofino  | cappellanus | San Pietro in Portovenere                   |
| 1406-10-20 | Preciosa Marocello     | monaca      | Santa Elena in Albaro                       |
| 1410-12-31 | Melchiorre Fatinante   | presbyter   | ...in Genoa                                 |
| 1424-04-14 | Stefano Merino         | canonicus   | ...                                         |
| 1425-01-05 | ---                    | monacus     | San Matteo in Genoa                         |
| 1428-02-22 | Maria Maruffo          | monaca      | San Bartolomeo del Fossato in Sampierdarena |
| 1429-05-19 | Luciano de Massa       | presbyter   | ...in Nice                                  |
| 1435-07-15 | Pietro de Leone        | rector      | San Vincenzo in Genoa                       |
| 1435-10-17 | Giovanni de Berardis   | mansonarius | ...in Genoa                                 |
| 1436-08-30 | Albertino de Tabia     | monacus     | ...                                         |
| 1437-08-10 | Luchina Castagna       | monaca      | Sant’Agata in Genoa                         |
| 1439-02-02 | Lodovico Fieschi       | clericus    | San Lorenzo in Genoa                        |
| 1441-10-20 | Giovanni de Guisulfis  | presbyter   | ...in Genoa                                 |
| 1449-05-29 | Antonio de Boianis     | presbyter   | ...in Genoa                                 |
| 1449-06-12 | Argenta Salvago        | monaca      | Santo Sepolcro in Sampierdarena             |
| 1450-07-18 | Argenta Salvago        | monaca      | Santo Sepolcro in Sampierdarena             |
| 1453-07-27 | Giovanni de Guisulfis  | presbyter   | ...in Genoa                                 |
| 1454-02-07 | Costanza Spinola       | monaca      | Santo Sepolcro in Sampierdarena             |
| 1457-02-01 | Isolta Interiano       | monaca      | Sant’Andrea in Genoa                        |
| 1457-02-17 | Argenta Salvago        | monaca      | Santo Sepolcro in Sampierdarena             |
| 1457-08-27 | Battista Grimaldi      | monacus     | San Crisotoforo in Marseilles               |
| 1458-01-21 | Costanza Spinola       | monaca      | Santo Sepolcro in Sampierdarena             |
| 1458-02-20 | Franchetta de Marco    | monaca      | Santa Maria in Sampierdarena                |
| 1459-05-29 | Argenta Salvago        | monaca      | Santo Sepolcro in Sampierdarena             |
| 1461-09-10 | Benedetto Doria        | prepostitus | San Lorenzo in Genoa                        |
| 1464-06-16 | Ginevra Macia          | monaca      | Santo Sepolcro in Sampierdarena             |
| 1471-11-11 | Battistina Spinola     | monaca      | ... in Genoa                                |
| 1474-12-17 | Argenta Salvago        | monaca      | Santa Caterina in Genoa                     |
| 1476-05-18 | Baltasar Segner        | monacus     | ...in Catalonia                             |
| 1476-08-20 | Illario de Murchio     | presbyter   | ...in Lavagna                               |
| 1483-09-09 | Girolamo de Camulio    | episcopus   | ...in Chios                                 |
| 1484-06-10 | Girolamo de Camulio    | episcopus   | ...in Chios                                 |
| 1485-04-21 | Girolamo de Camulio    | episcopus   | ...in Chios                                 |
| 1486-05-12 | Girolamo de Camulio    | episcopus   | ...in Chios                                 |
| 1487-09-20 | Alessandro Ravaschiero | monacus     | Pieve di Sant’Andrea in Sarzana             |
| 1488-07-31 | Girolamo de Camulio    | episcopus   | ...in Chios                                 |
| 1492-02-07 | Alessandro Ravaschiero | monacus     | Pieve di Sant’Andrea in Sarzana             |
| 1495-12-16 | Girolamo de Camulio    | episcopus   | ...in Chios                                 |
| 1521-11-27 | Maria de Marini        | monaca      | Santo Sepolcro in Sampierdarena             |

## 13.2 Girolamo de Camulio and the redemption of the enslaved

The strong and continuous participation by men and women from religious institutions in the market economy of slavery was illustrated in the previous chapters examining sales, leasing, and insurance contracts. The presence men and women from various religious orders as slaveholders was similarly attested in manumission contracts. The activities of one high-ranking ecclesiastical individual in the economy of slavery will illustrate how manumissions reflect the nascent activity of ransoming enslaved persons in fifteenth century Genoa.

In January 1470 a friar from the Franciscan order named Girolamo de Camulio was elected as the bishop of Chios.[[26\]](#_ftn26) This appointment and its residency within the bustling commercial port of Chios brought the newly minted bishop into close daily contact with the mass of enslaved persons who were exchanged at the squares, shops, and notarial tables on a daily basis.[[27\]](#_ftn27) The bishop had his residence within the Castle of Chios and shared the same space with the merchants who represented the *maona* and administered the economic affairs of the colony. The port of Chios was the central node of the Aegean slaving zone and an important nexus of exchange for enslaved persons amongst merchants from western Europe, the Ottoman Empire, and the Hafsid Dynasty. Girolamo would have been no stranger to the market economy of slavery. He would have been aware of the regular presence of enslaved persons in the streets of Genoa. Several members of his albergo were also active in the buying and selling of enslaved persons and several others worked as notaries who recorded these transactions. The notary Giacomo de Camulio, a close relative of Girolamo, had enacted several sales and leasing contracts for enslaved women in the early fifteenth century and was also a slaveholder himself.[[28\]](#_ftn28) It is also likely that the monastery in which Girolamo was stationed probably held one or two enslaved persons who worked as servants and labourers. The scale of the market economy of slavery in Chios, however, dwarfed that of Genoa, and the continual and unrelenting exchange of enslaved persons seems to have affected his outlook on the dismal enterprise.

Geo Pistarino has identified Girolamo as a prototypical religious slaveholder but an closer analysis of his activity in the notarial record suggests the his main business seemed to be ransoming.[[29\]](#_ftn29) Mediterranean historiography has typically considered ransoming in tandem with captivity resulting from military engagement or piracy and thus as a process that occurred across national, imperial, or confessional boundaries.[[30\]](#_ftn30) The activities of Girolamo provide an example of a western Christian ransoming enslaved persons held by other western Christians.

The fear that an Ottoman invasion of Chios was imminent resulted in Girolamo leaving the island and returning to Genoa during the summer of 1484.[[31\]](#_ftn31) The tumultuous events of the past few decades—the loss of the colonies of Pera in 1453, Phocaea in 1455, Famagusta in 1473, and Caffa in 1475—would have certainly instilled the feeling that the days of Genoese colonial administration in Chios were numbered. In the summer of 1483, a year before he left the colony, Girolamo purchased an enslaved Wallachian child named Teodora from the merchant Giovanni de Sigrestro.[[32\]](#_ftn32) Teodora obtained here freedom about eight months later under the condition that she continued to work as a household servant in Genoa for his sister Teodora de Camulio for the next seven years.[[33\]](#_ftn33) He brought the formerly enslaved Teodora with him, along with at least two other enslaved women, when he returned to Genoa from Chios.

Girolamo continued to be involved in several manumissions after his return to Genoa in 1484. In the spring of 1485, he leased out an enslaved Albanian woman named Anna to the pelter Bernardo Celesia for a term of four years and total payment of 30 Genoese lire. The lease stipulated that she be liberated at the end of the contract.[[34\]](#_ftn34) Anna had been held by his sister Teodora, who had transferred custody of her over to Girolamo before the lease was enacted. This is the same Teodora de Camulio who now held the enslaved Wallachian that Girolamo had brought from Chios: it appears that she probably did not require two household servants. This agreement allowed Girolamo to recover the amount he had paid in Chios, ensuring the liberation of the two enslaved women and, furthermore, that these liberations did not come with a financial cost to himself or a loss of labour in the household of his sister.

In the summer of the same year Girolamo purchased an enslaved baptized Muslim woman named Linor from certain Giovanni Antonio Cavatia, an itinerant Genoese merchant who had obtained her in Seville.[[35\]](#_ftn35) The transaction was not notarized but simply recorded in the private account book of the itinerant merchant. Linor remained in the household of Girolamo for several months until the spring of 1486, at which point she was liberated under the condition that she remain within the city of Genoa for the next three years and not leave without his express permission.[[36\]](#_ftn36) This is an example of a restriction on movement clause that we have already seen in sales and leasing contracts for enslaved persons, but in this case, it was applied to a liberated person. The contract does not provide any rationale for imposing this condition, but it is likely based on a fear that Linor would revert to the Islamic faith if she were immediately allowed to return to Seville and reintegrate into its Islamic community. Linor would have certainly been baptized as a Christian by Girolamo—as the enslaved child Teodora was in Chios—unless she had already been baptized at some earlier date. Ensuring that Linor remain in Genoa during the first few years of her freedom might have been a means of encouraging her acculturation as a member of the Genoese Christian community.

In the same month as the liberation of Linor an enslaved Greek woman named Elena petitioned the *Officium sindicatorum* for her freedom. She argued that she was a practicing Christian from the island of Negroponte who had been taken into captivity—probably during the Ottoman–Venetian War of 1463–79—and subsequently sold into slavery in Chios to the merchant Andrea de Monelia. The *sindicatores* referred the petition to Girolamo de Camulio, probably due to his experience as the bishop of Chios, and upon consideration of her argument he declared that Elena was a free woman and must be liberated. The liberation also required that Andrea be financially compensated for the loss of Elena and so Girolamo arranged that a payment of 20 Genoese ducats be made by a certain Niccolò Piccaluga from Sampierdarena. The formerly enslaved Elena agreed to serve in the household of Niccolò for the next five years to reimburse him for the payment to her former holder.[[37\]](#_ftn37)

Girolamo had brought at least two enslaved women with him from Chios when he returned to Genoas in the summer of 1484. This included an enslaved Bosnian woman named Maria whom he had purchased in Chios at some unspecified date from a Ragusan merchant. In the summer of 1488, the formerly enslaved woman named Maria, who was described as “from Sclavonia” was liberated by Girolamo without any further conditions.[[38\]](#_ftn38) The purchase of an enslaved Jewish refugee from Iberia in late 1492 would allow him to make yet another baptism and subsequent manumission. This same enslaved refugee was sold three years later in the winter of 1495, with the assurance that she would be liberated after a term of five years of service.[[39\]](#_ftn39)

These combinations of purchases and manumissions by Girolamo de Camulio were essentially forms of ransoming. Girolamo purchased enslaved women in order to liberate them while obtaining the reimbursement of the purchase price from some third party, thereby ensuring that the manumissions did not impact him financially. The use of a combination of contracts and obligations ensured that the enslaved would be ultimately paying their own ransoms through some form of future service. This allowed Girolamo to accumulate significant spiritual capital through so-called ‘good works’—that is, the liberation of Christians from the bonds of enslavement.

Girolamo was an active participant in the ecclesiastical life of the city after his return from Chios in 1484. In his first year back in the city he served a brief one year term as the vicar to the archbishop of Genoa.[[40\]](#_ftn40) The chronicler Johann Burchard reports that he was at the Chiesa di Santi XII Apostoli in Rome in May 1489, where he delivered the mass for the Feast of the Apostles Philip and James to Pope Innocent VIII and the assembled papal curia.[[41\]](#_ftn41) Girolamo also played a prominent role in the ceremonial return of relics that had been stolen from the abbey of Sant’Andrea in 1492.[[42\]](#_ftn42) These activities served to present Girolamo as a revered statesman of the ecclesiastical community and his ransoming of enslaved women—which was likely a sincere activity based upon piety and moral concern around enslavement—also served to enhance this public image. This is reflected in the locations where the contracts were drawn up and the stature of the witnesses who were present. These contracts were all enacted in prominent locales: for example, the ducal palace, the residence of the archbishop of Genoa, and in Girolamo’s own residence.[[43\]](#_ftn43) The witnesses to many of these contracts were also prominent figures within the Genoese political and ecclesiastical hierarchy: for example, the chancellor of Sarzana named Gaspare de Ivanis, the priest of the Church of Santa Lucia named Pietro de Mulassana, and the provost of the Church of Santi Nazario e Celso in Genoa named Battista Durante.[[44\]](#_ftn44) The prominent locations of enactment and the social status of the witnesses are important: they serve to emphasize the pious nature of Girolamo through the public performance of manumission in the presence of his ecclesiastical contemporaries. The enslaved persons liberated by Girolamo were all non-Christian when he had acquired them, and therefore their forced baptism and subsequent manumission served to emphasize his incursions into the economy of slavery as pious acts in the eyes of his contemporaries. In this manner Girolamo was not only accumulating spiritual capital for the afterlife, but also accumulating social capital for himself and his albergo.

**

This short chapter considered the attestation of men and women from religious institutions named as slaveholders in the late medieval Genoese Mediterranean. Their participation in this endeavour demonstrated how they circumvented religious concerns about slaveholding and usury by using insurance contracts developed by the mercantile community in the fourteenth century for the explicit purpose of concealing usury. It also identified some of the religious institutions that were particularly active in the market economy of slavery. Further research is required into the life on enslaved men and women within these spaces, particularly with regards to their socioeconomic role within the larger religious community, their relationship to the specific slaveholder named in the contracts, and the determination of the persons responsible for providing material and financial support for the enslaved. The outline of the life and participation of Girolamo de Camulio, the Genoese archbishop of Chios, also demonstrates the emergence and structure of the process of redemption in fifteenth-century Genoa.

------

[[1\]](#_ftnref1) Pierre Bonnassié, *From Slavery to Feudalism in South-Western Europe*, trans. Jean Birrell (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991), pp. 30–2.

[[2\]](#_ftnref2) ASGe, Notai antichi 576, Antonio Fazio, filza 2, series I, nr. 280, dated 1428-02-22. The sale price was 140 Genoese lire. See description in Domenico Gioffrè, *Il mercato degli schiavi a Genova nel secolo XV* (Genova: Fratelli Bozzi, 1971), p. 216. The convent of San Bartolomeo del Fossato is still operational and is located in the western outskirts of Genoa in the Sampierdarena neighborhood. See ASCGe, Manoscritti 23, Origine e successi delle chiese, monasterii e luoghi pii della città e riviere di Genova, fols. 66v–68v; Clario di Fabio, “San Bartolomeo del Fossato,” in *Medioevo restaurato: Genova 1860–1940*, ed. Colette Dufour Bozzo (Genova: Pirella, 1984), pp. 85–104.

[[3\]](#_ftnref3) ASGe, Notai antichi 990, Lorenzo Costa, filza 4, nr. 880, dated 1471-11-11, where “Venerabiles sororer Brigida et Baptistina de Spinulis moniales in monasterio monialium sancte Barnabe extra muros civitatis Ianue, et ad cautelam in presentia cum consensuamentu et voluntate infrascriptarum dominarum, abbatisse et monialium dicti monasterii... vendiderunt et titulo et ex causa venditionis dederunt cesserunt traddiderunt et mandaverunt seu quasi Stephano de Clavaro filio Leonis... quamdam ipsarum sororum Brigide et Baptistine sclavam vocatam Ellenam etatis annorun triginta trium in circa de progenie Ungarorum ut asserit...” see doc. 70 in Luigi Tria, *La schiavitù in Liguria: ricerche e documenti* (Genova: Società ligure di storia patria, 1947), pp. 201–3. Santa Barnaba was a Cistercian monastery for religious women located outside the city walls on the north-west corner of Genoa. The monastery was closed in the year 1516 but the structure still operates as a church. See also ASCGe, Manoscritti 23, Origine e successi delle chiese, monasterii e luoghi pii della città e riviere di Genova, fols. 64v–65r; Valeria Polonio, “Tra universalismo e localismo: costruzione di un sistema (569–1321),” in *Il cammino della Chiesa genovese, dalle origini ai giorni nostri*, ed. Dino Puncuh (Genova: Società ligure di storia patria, 1999), p. 197.

[[4\]](#_ftnref4) ASGe, Notai antichi 762, Giovanni Loggia, filza 1, series II, nr. 94, dated 1450-07-18, where “domina soror Argenta Salvaiga abbatissa monasterii Sancti Sepulcri de Sancto Petro Arene... habuisse et recepisse in Antonio de Sarzana factore ipsius Dominici Bartolomei presente libras quinque Ianuinorum in pecunia numerata... precii cuiusdam sclave alias vendite per ipsam dominam sororem...”

[[5\]](#_ftnref5) ASGe, Notai antichi 719, Bartolomeo Risso, filza 5, series III, nr. 3, dated 1457-02-11, where “Constancia Spinula monialis monasterii Sepulcri in villa Sancti Petri Arene... vendidit et titulo vendicionis dedit cessis tradidit et mandavit seu quasi Antonio de Cazanova civis Ianue quondam Gabrieli... quandam sclavam ipsius Constancie vocatam Margarita de progenie [blank space] ectatis annorum triginta quinque in circa...”

[[6\]](#_ftnref6) ASGe, Notai antichi 444, Oberto Foglietta, filza 1, nr. 14, dated 1379-01-20, where the request was made by his deceased spouse named “Scota filia quondam Ciaiha Abraym de Syria et uxor dicti Rafaelis libras mille Ianue dotis...” in order to obtain the restitution of her dowry; see Giustina Olgiati, *Genova, porta del mondo: la città medievale e i suoi* habitatores (Genova: Glauco Brigati, 2011), pp. 88–9.

[[7\]](#_ftnref7) Catherine Otten-Froux, “Un notaire vénitien à Famagouste au XIVe siècle. Les actes de Simeone, prêtre de San Giacomo dell’Orio (1362–1371),” *Thesaurismata* 33 (2003), doc. 78, p. 75, the purchase of a vessel dated 1363-11-15 by “Augustinus Damar.”

[[8\]](#_ftnref8) Sister Tommasina Gentile made the choice to abandon the monastery in the early weeks of January 1396; see Adriano Cuneo, *Il Palazzo del Monastero in Sampierdarena* (Sampierdarena: Federico Reale, 1912), p. 11. The political infighting between various factions allied the Grimaldi, Adorno, Montaldo, and Guarco families in Genoa had become actual fighting conduced in the rural locales surrounding the Polcevera valley where the monastery was located. See Giorgio and Giovanni Stella, *Annales Genuenses*, ed. Giovanna Petti Balbi (Bologna: Zanichelli, 1975), pp. 214–7.

[[9\]](#_ftnref9) ASGe, Notai antichi 422, Cristoforo de Revellino, register 10, 1396, fol. 44r, entry dated 1396-01-28, where “Thomaxina Gentilis abbatissa monasterii sancti Sepulcri de Sancto Petro Arene, in presentia consensu auctoritate et voluntate infrascriptarum sororum et monialium dicti monasterii et quarum que presentibus interfuerunt nomina inferius denotantur et sunt hec domin[e] soror[es] Elliana Cigalla... Salvagia Cigalla... Theodora Archanta... Marieta Archanta... Isolta de Mari... locaverunt et titulo locationis concesserunt Iohanni Ricio lanerio filio Thome... quandam sclavam nomine Margarita que fuit quondam Augustini de Mari et est illa sclava quam Christianus Spinula emit in publica calega facta de mandato dominarum conservatorum civitatis Ianue... ad annos sex tunc proxime venturos...”

[[10\]](#_ftnref10) See page 311 for details on his activities.

[[11\]](#_ftnref11) ASGe, Notai antichi 503, Giacomo de Camulio, filza 7, nr. 155, dated 1449-06-12; see the description in Gioffrè, *Il mercato degli schiavi a Genova nel secolo XV*, p. 266.

[[12\]](#_ftnref12) ASGe, Notai antichi 645, Battista Crosa, filza 1, nr. 645, dated 1449-12-02, where “Iacopo de Pasano civis Ianue locavit et titulo locationis concessit Antonio de Boianis presbyter... quandam servam... nominatam Luciam de progenie Grecorum...”

[[13\]](#_ftnref13) ASCGe, Manoscritti 16, Famiglie di Genova antiche e moderne. Tomo I, parte II. Lettera B, fol. 260r; ASCGe, Manoscritti 52, Famiglie popolari genovesi, fol. 94. The commune of Bargone, approximately 50 km east of Genoa, contained approximately three hundred households in the fifteenth century; see Françoise Robin, *Sestri Levante, un bourg de la Ligurie Génoise au XVe siècle* (La Spezia: Istituto internazionale di studi liguri, 1976), pp. 115–9.

[[14\]](#_ftnref14) ASGe, Notai antichi 998, Lorenzo Costa, filza 12, nr. 527, dated 1487-11-04, where “Baptisa de Palodio tanquam procurator et procuratorio... locavit et titulo locationis... Alexander de Ravascheriis dei et apostolice sedis gratia abbatis monasterii Sancti Andree de Borzono... quandam sclavam... nominatam Mariam de progenie Ungarorum...”

[[15\]](#_ftnref15) ASGe, Notai antichi 898, Tommaso Duracino, filza 11, nr. 15, dated 1468-01-04, where Raffaele Doria sells an enslaved Abkhazan named Maria, who is approximately 21 years of age, to the merchant from Valencia named Gabriele Marco; see the brief description of this sale in Gioffrè, *Il mercato degli schiavi a Genova nel secolo XV*, p. 269.

[[16\]](#_ftnref16) ASGe, Notai antichi 1242, Girolamo de Uvada, filza 1, nr. 336, dated 1485-09-22, where Raffaele Doria leases out an enslaved Albanian named Maria, who is approximately 35 years of age, to the merchant named Niccolò Piccamiglio, for a term of twelve years; see the brief description in Gioffrè, *Il mercato degli schiavi a Genova nel secolo XV*, p. 300.

[[17\]](#_ftnref17) ASGe, Notai antichi 997, Lorenzo Costa, filza 12, nrs. 402 and 404, dated 1487-09-10, a testament which names his sons Pietro and Giovanni Francesco as his heirs, with Lazzaro Lomellini named as their guardian, indicating that they were not yet of the age of majority and since both Maria Doria, the mother of Pietro, and Caterina Cattaneo, the mother of Giovanni Francesco, were also both declared as deceased.

[[18\]](#_ftnref18) Valeria Polonio, “Battaglie fiscali nel tardo Quattrocento genovese: clero e laici,” in Ianuensis non nascitur sed fit*. Studi per Dino Puncuh* (Genova: Società ligure di storia patria, 2019), pp. 1085–8; Giovanni Brizzolara, *Storia della’Abbazia parrocchiale e plebana di S. Andrea di Borzone* (Sampierdarena: Tipografia Salesiana, 1891),pp. 148–9.

[[19\]](#_ftnref19) ASGe, Notai antichi 891, Tommaso Duracino, filza 4, nr. 274, dated 1459-05-29: “Merualdus de Grimaldis civis Ianue Luciani... recognovit et recognoscit... sororis Argentine Salvaige abbatisse monasterii Sancti Sepulcri de Sancto Petro Arene et per me dictum notarium infrascriptum eidem sorori Argentine licet absenti... emisse, habuisse, et recipisse tantam quantitatem suarum rerum et mercium bonarum... cum effectu hinc ad menses septem proxime venturos libras centum septuaginta Ianuinorum monete currentis... si quedam sclava dicte sororis Argente nominata Lucia de progenie Rubeorum ectatis annorum viginti duorum vel circa gravida seu pregnans mensium quatuor vel circa de partu suo et de dicta eius gravidacionis et pregnacionis... salva et viva evaserit quod tunc et eo casu presens instrumentum sit casum irritum et nullum...”. On the monastery of Santo Sepolcro di Sampierdarena, see ASCGe, Manoscritti 23, Origine e successi delle chiese, monasterii e luoghi pii della città e riviere di Genova, fol. 643r; as well as Adriano Cuneo, *Il Palazzo del Monastero in Sampierdarena* (Sampierdarena: Federico Reale, 1912), pp. 5–29. The monastery was suppressed by Leo X in 1514 and demolished in 1912. A post office now stands in its place.

[[20\]](#_ftnref20) See Chapter 7 for details.

[[21\]](#_ftnref21) ASGe, Notai antichi 890, Tommaso Duracino, filza 3, series I, nr. 68, dated 1457-02-21, where “Gaspare Spinula civis Ianue quondam Baptiste sponte et ex certa stiam confessus fuit et confitetur in veritate presenti recognovit et recognoscit mihi notario infrascripto tanquam presenti persone officio presento stipulanti et recipenti nomine et vice sororis Isolte Italiane monialis in monasterio Sancti Andreae de Ianua et per me dictum notarium infrascriptum eidem Isolte licet absenti se ab ibsa Isolta...” The Benedictine convent of Sant’Andrea was located adjacent to the Porta Soprana and was demolished in the nineteenth century. See ASCGe, Manoscritti 23, Origine e successi delle chiese, monasterii e luoghi pii della città e riviere di Genova, fols. 11r–14v; Francesco Podestà, *Il colle di S. Andrea in Genova e le regioni circostanti* (Genova: Società ligure di storia patria, 1901), pp. 31–52.

[[22\]](#_ftnref22) See the discussion beginning on page 182 for an analysis of the terms of coverage in life insurance contracts for enslaved women.

[[23\]](#_ftnref23) ASGe, Notai antichi 719, Bartolomeo Risso, filza 5, series III, nr. 97c, dated 1458-02-15: “Ioffredus Lercaris domini Gasparis aseccuravit per libras centum quinquaginta Ianiorium monete currentis domine Francheta de Marco prioresa monasterio Sancte Marie Petre Minute super quadam eius sclava vocata Maria de progenie Zicorum ectatis annorum viginta quinque in circa, que devento in gravida de ea gravidacione et partuque eiusdem et occasione ipsius et cetera...” The monastery of Santa Maria di Pietraminuta was closed in 1508. See ASCGe, Manoscritti 23, Origine e successi delle chiese, monasterii e luoghi pii della città e riviere di Genova, fol. 451r; Valeria Polonio, “Tra universalismo e localismo: costruzione di un sistema (569–1321),” in *Il cammino della Chiesa genovese, dalle origini ai giorni nostri* (Genova: Società ligure di storia patria, 1999), p. 198; Id., “I Cistercensi in Liguria (secoli XII–XIV),” in *Monasteria nova: storia e architettura dei cistercensi in Liguria (secc. XII–XIV)*, eds. Colette Bozzo Dufour and Anna Dagnino (Genova: Donati, 1998), p. 43.

[[24\]](#_ftnref24) Geo Pistarino, “Tra liberi e schiave a Genova nel Quattrocento,” *Anuario de estudios medievales* 1 (1964), p. 355. Pistarino notes the presence of enslaved women in several male and female religious orders, as well as in the homes of several bishops and priests.

[[25\]](#_ftnref25) I have only been able to locate six contracts in which enslaved pregnant women were insured by monastic institutions, all of which were female institutions. It might be the case that women in these female institutions were more likely to be exploited than enslaved women held by male institutions. Or perhaps it was more likely that male institutions were more averse to holding enslaved women: less than twenty percent of monastic institutions holding enslaved persons were male monastic institutions.

[[26\]](#_ftnref26) ASCGe, Manoscritti 26, Origine e fasti delle nobili famiglie di Genova, fol. 199, where “1470 frate Geronimo Camogli dell’ordine de Minori eletto in quest’anno Vescovo di Scio...”; see also Laura Balletto, “Brevi note su Antonio Pallavicino, vescovo di Chio (1450–1470),” in *Ianuensis non nascitur sed fit. Studi per Dino Puncuh* (Genova: Società ligure di storia patria, 2019), pp. 13–6; Carlo Pagano, *Delle imprese e del dominio dei Genovesi nella Grecia* (Genova: Fratelli Pagano, 1846), p. 230. Girolamo succeeded the nobleman Antonio Pallavicini as bishop of Chios, who had served in the position since 1450.

[[27\]](#_ftnref27) Philip Argenti, *The Occupation of Chios by the Genoese and Their Administration of the Island, 1346–1566. Volume I: Text* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1958), pp. 624–5.

[[28\]](#_ftnref28) ASGe, Notai antichi 410, Ambrogio Fasciolo, register 1, volume II, 1333–1415, fol. 161r, where “nobilis et potens vir dominus Benedictus de Flisco Lavanie comes quondam domini Lodisii civis Ianue vendidit cessit et traddidit, seu quasi, Iacobo de Camulio notario civi Ianue presenti ementi et stipulanti pro se et habituris causam ab eo, quandam sclavam ipsius domini Benedicti vocatam Magdalena, de proienie Tartarorum, vel alterius proienie qua esset, ettatis annorum viginti sex vel circa...”; ASGe, Notai antichi 503, Giacomo de Camulio, filza 7, nr. 155, dated 1449-06-12, where the sisters of the monastery of Santo Sepolcro lease out an enslaved Abkhazan named Lucia, who is 25 years of age, to the nobleman named Bartolomeo Doria, for a term of 13 years and a total cost of 130 Genoese lire.

[[29\]](#_ftnref29) Pistarino, “Tra liberi e schiave a Genova nel Quattrocento,” p. 355; see also Carlo Brizzolari, *Gli ebrei nella storia di Genova* (Genova: Sabatelli, 1971), pp. 82–3.

[[30\]](#_ftnref30) There is a rich historiography on the topic for the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. For an overview see Salvatore Bono, “Istituzioni per il riscatto di schiavi nel mondo mediterraneo: annotazioni storiografiche,” *Nuovi studi livornesi* 8 (2000), pp. 29–43. For our period see Jacques Heers, *Esclaves et domestiques au Moyen Âge dans le monde méditerranéen* (Paris: Arthème Fayard, 1981), pp. 50–7 who discusses the ransoming of Muslim captives captured by Genoese and Castilian pirates to the Hafsids and Ottoman; see also Salvatore Fodale, “Solidarietà pubblica e riscatto dei cattivi (secc. XIV–XV),” in *Schiavitù religione e libertà nel Mediterraneo tra medioevo ed età moderna* (Cosenza: Pellegrini, 2008), pp. 21–47 who discusses the ransoming of Sicilian Christian captives captured by Tunisian corsairs.

[[31\]](#_ftnref31) Argenti, *The Occupation of Chios by the Genoese. Volume I*, pp. 246–50.

[[32\]](#_ftnref32) ASGe, Notai ignoti, busta 63, 1480–1500, nr. 30, where “Iohannes de Sigestro Raffaelis... vendidit et titulo et causa venditionis dedit cessit tradidit et mandavit et consignavit reverendo domino Ieronimo de Camulio episcopo chiensi... quandam sclavam nominatam Theodoram de progenie Valaccorum etatis annorum undecirn in circa...”; see also Geo Pistarino, *Chio dei Genovesi nel tempo di Cristoforo Colombo* (Roma: Istituto poligrafico e Zecca dello Stato, 1995), p. 440.

[[33\]](#_ftnref33) ASGe, Notai antichi 1205, Agostino Foglietta, filza 1, nr. 206, dated 1484-06-10; see the description in Laura Balletto, “Tra Andros veneziana e Chio dei genovesi nel Quattrocento,” *Thesaurismata* 31 (2001), p. 105; see also Gian Giacomo Musso, “Nuove ricerche d’archivio su Genova e l’Europa centro-orientale nell’ultimo Medio evo,” *Rivista storica italiana* 83, no. 1 (1971), p. 143.

[[34\]](#_ftnref34) ASGe, Notai antichi 1095, Pietro de Ripalta, filza 3, nr. 356, dated 1485-04-21, where “reverendus dominus Ieronimus de Camulio dei et apostolice sedis gratia episcopus chiensis vendidit ac titulo et ex causa vendicionis dedit et tradidit Bernardo Alexie pelipario... servam nomine Annam de progenie Albanensium etatis annorum vigintiquatuor in circa pro annis quatuor proxime venturos... quibus finitis sit libera et franca et restet sui iuris... quas libras triginta ianuinorum prefatus reverendus dominus Episcopus confessus et confitetur habuisse a dicto Bernardo...”; see partial edition in Tria, *La schiavitù in Liguria*, doc. 79; see also Laura Balletto, “Schiavi albanesi a Genova nel XV secolo,” in *Οι Αλβανοί στο Μεσαίωνα* (Ινστιτούτο Βυζαντινών Ερευνών, 1998), pp. 340–1; Pistarino, “Tra liberi e schiave nel Quattrocento”, pp. 358–9.

[[35\]](#_ftnref35) ASGe, Manoscritti 17, Famiglie di Genova antiche e moderne. Tomo IV, parte II. Lettera C, fol. 191r describes Giovanni Antonio Cavatia as an itinerant Genoese merchant and patron of several ships who was active in the commercial ports of Catalonia and Venice during the later fifteenth century.

[[36\]](#_ftnref36) ASGe, Notai antichi 821, Andrea de Cairo, filza 41, series I, nr. 140, dated 1486-05-12, where “reverendus in Christo pater dominus Hieronimus de Camulio Dei et apostolice sedis gratia episcopus Chiensis in civitate Ianue residens, dominus et patronus Linoris serve sue etatis annorum decem novem vel circa de progenie Maurorum oriunde Sibilie quam ipse dominus Ieronimus episcopus alias emit a Iohanne Anthonio Cavatia cive Ianue vigore apodisie scripte manu propria dicti Iohannis Antonii anno proxime preterito de mense Augusti... franchivit liberavit exemit et manumissit et a manibus dominio et potestate ipsius reverendi domini Ieronmi episcopi et ab omni servitute et obligatione qua ipsa Linor eidem domino episcopo teneretur et quomodolibet obligata esset penitus absolvit ipsamque Linorem et quascumque liberas suas et ea descendentes natalibus...”

[[37\]](#_ftnref37) ASGe, Notai antichi 956, Giovanni Battista Parisola, filza 6, series I, nr. 126, dated 1486-05-19, where “quod Elena grecha de Nigroponte staret in domo Andree de Monelia in Chio qui ipsam Elenam pro serva tenebat et cum etiam verum sit quod in dicto loco Chii dicta Elena se proclamaverit ad libertatem, habuitque recursum ad Reverendum in Christo patrem dominum Ieronimum de Camulio Episcopum chiensem qui per publicam sententiam ipsam Elenam tamquam Christianam liberavit, cum hoc quod dicta Elena daret et solveret dicto Andree ducatos viginti quinque Chii pro expensis factis ipsi Elene per dictum Andream et quos ducatos viginti quinque Chii Nicolaus Pichaluga de Sancto Petro Arena solvit dito Andree... et Elena... promisit et promittit dicto Nicolao... bene fideliter et legaliter servire pro serva annis quinque proxime secuturis...”; see partial edition in Tria, *La schiavitù in Liguria*, doc. 80; see also Laura Balletto, “Stranieri e forestieri a Genova: schiavi e manomessi (secolo XV),” in *Forestieri e stranieri nelle città basso-medievali* (Firenze: Salimbeni, 1988), p. 277.

[[38\]](#_ftnref38) ASGe, Notai antichi 872bis, Emmanuele Granello, filza 3, nr. 299, dated 1488-07-31, where “reverendus in Christo pater dominus Ieronimus de Camulio dei et apostolica sedis gratia episcopus chiensis, advertens et consideras grata servicia et beneficia ac obsequia eidem reverendo domino Ieronimo episcopo hactenus facta et prestita per Mariam servam sive sclavam suam de Sclavonia de progenie Boxnie alias per ipsum... Ieronimum episcopum empta in Chio a quodam Ragusano etatis annorum viginti novem vel circa...”; see partial edition in Tria, *La schiavitù in Liguria*, doc. 88.

[[39\]](#_ftnref39) ASGe, Notai antichi 1299, Antonio Pastorino, filza 10, nr. 1129, dated 1495-12-16; see Guido Zazzu, *Sepharad addio: 1492, i profughi ebrei dalla Spagna al ghetto di Genova* (Genova: Marietti, 1991), p. 133; Rossana Urbani and Guido Zazzu, *The Jews in Genoa* (Leiden: Brill Academic Publishers, 1999), p. 74.

[[40\]](#_ftnref40) Laura Balletto, “Hommes et marchandises entre Gênes et la Corse au XVe siècle,” *Actes des congrès nationaux des sociétés historiques et scientifiques* 128, no. 19 (2009), p. 20; Luigi Levati, *Dogi perpetui di Genova 1339–1528* (Genova: Marchese e Campora, 1928), p. 435.

[[41\]](#_ftnref41) Johann Burchard, Liber notarum, ab anno MCCCCLXXXIII usque ad annum MDVI. Volume I (Città di Castello: Scipione Lapi, 1907), p. 266. Burchard notes favorably that the mass contained only a brief preface and prayer and that no sermon was delivered.

[[42\]](#_ftnref42) Marcello Staglieno, “Un furto di sacre reliquie dalla Badia di Sestri nel 1492,” *Giornale storico e letterario della Liguria* 1ª serie, 3 (1902), pp. 455–6.

[[43\]](#_ftnref43) ASGe, Notai antichi 872bis, Emmanuele Granello, filza 3, nr. 299, dated 1488-07-31, enacted “Ianue in audienta curie archiepiscopali Ianuensis...”; ASGe, Notai antichi 1095, Pietro de Ripalta, filza 3, nr. 356, dated 1485-04-21, enacted “Ianue in palacio ducali videlicet in cancellaria...”; ASGe, Notai antichi 821, Andrea de Cairo, filza 41, series I, nr. 140, dated 1486-05-12, enacted “Ianue in contracta Manussale videlicet in aula domus habitacionis prefati reverendi domini Ieronimi de Camulio episcopi Chiensis...”

[[44\]](#_ftnref44) ASGe, Notai antichi 1095, Pietro de Ripalta, filza 3, nr. 356, dated 1485-04-21, with “test[is] egregius Gaspar de Ivanis de Sarzana cancellarii...”; ASGe, Notai antichi 821, Andrea de Cairo, filza 41, series I, nr. 140, dated 1486-05-12, with “test[e] venerabili domino presbitero Petro de Mulasano capellano in ecclesia Sancti Luce Ianuensis...”; ASGe, Notai antichi 872bis, Emmanuele Granello, filza 3, nr. 299, dated 1488-07-31, with “test[e] domino Baptista Durante de Stalanello preposito ecclesie Sanctorum Nazarii et Celsi de Ianua...”