# Chapter 14 Freedom from the bonds of enslavement: granting and taking liberty in the Genoese Mediterranean

Three critical junctures in the life cycle of enslavement within the Republic of Genoa and its colonies—the purchase, leasing, and insurance of enslaved persons—were significant and often traumatic social ruptures in the lived experience of enslaved persons. They also represented opportunities by which slaveholders could accumulate various forms of social and financial capital from the transfer and exploitation of the enslaved. This chapter examines what might appear to be the final event in the life cycle of enslavement: the manumission of enslaved persons. The act of manumission could offer the possibility—by ostensibly terminating the life cycle of enslavement—for some form of social rebirth.[[1\]](#_ftn1) It could also represent a peril, casting a formerly enslaved man or woman into a society with minimal social support and in which they would have little possibility for success or happiness.

This chapter will expand upon the economies of enslavement by examining the specialized notarial acts that recorded manumission of enslaved persons. These acts further elucidate the complex network of capital exchange that characterized the economy of enslavement in the late medieval Mediterranean. The process of manumission was predicated on the exchange of social, human, financial and spiritual capital between slaveholders and the enslaved. The overall picture reveals the continued use and abuse of the enslaved across the entire life cycle of enslavement, illuminating the system whereby the extraction and accumulation of capital by merchant elites was predicated on the exploitation of the bodies and labour of enslaved persons. This picture is a grim one. There were momentary possibilities within this repressive system, however, for agency by the enslaved, and the acts of manumission provide additional brief insights into the lived experience of the enslaved through these moments of slippage and discontinuity.

## 14.1 Enslavement and categories of unfreedom

Slavery has been an omnipresent phenomenon in European society in one form or another since the Bronze Age. Its continual rationalization, therefore, was a vital component in the development of moral and political philosophy from the age of Antiquity. The writings of the Greek philosopher Aristotle regarded slavery as a natural state of human development. He argued that certain persons were incapable of fully developing their rational faculties, and as such, were more akin to animals than human beings. Aristotle called these persons “natural slaves” who, as a result of their essentially non-rational nature, were deemed suitable for manual labour and menial tasks under the management of a *dominus*, much in the way that animals were used for labour and menial tasks by the farmer.[[2\]](#_ftn2) The revival of Aristotelian thought in the twelfth century by Thomas Aquinas and other theologians would also return to this essentialist idea of natural slavery, although it would not gain significant intellectual and political traction until the period of trans-Atlantic slavery, with grave consequences for peoples from the continent of Africa in particular.[[3\]](#_ftn3) The rise of Mediterranean slavery in Genoa and its colonies after the twelfth century was instead defined and supported by the ideals of classical Roman jurisprudence.[[4\]](#_ftn4) An enslaved person in the Genoese Mediterranean was not a legally defined as a ‘person’ in Roman law but as an item of property. Any rights with regards to the enslaved were the rights of the slaveholder as the owner of an item of property. These rights over an enslaved person as an item of property could furthermore be delegated and transferred to another person.[[5\]](#_ftn5) An enslaved person was thus generally represented as an object in a contractual arrangement between two or more principals, as we have already seen in the analysis of sales, leasing, and insurance contracts.

The legal framework of Genoese slavery was based on Roman law, but it developed and evolved within a significantly different historical context than that of the classical Roman Empire. In the classical period, the supply of enslaved persons was primarily the result of the relentless war and conquest by the Romans themselves. The enemy combatants captured in the battles of Antiquity lost their rights of a free person: their circumstantial status as captives transformed their legal status from persons into property.[[6\]](#_ftn6) The supply of enslaved persons was in the medieval Mediterranean was superficially the result of commerce between west European merchants and merchants from Tatar, Russian, and Mongol polities, among others. These captive men and women from the polities surrounding the Black Sea had lost their status as free persons in this revived Roman law as a result of their capture through military skirmishes and slave raiding of their neighbours. The legal norms of delegation and transfer of property thus applied: their status as property remained as they were transferred into Genoese hands. The notion, however, that the Genoese obtained their supply of enslaved persons solely through commerce rather than conquest needs to be analyzed in greater detail as it disguises the entangled links between commerce and violence in the eastern Mediterranean. The voracious economic demand for enslaved persons created by the appearance of Genoese and European merchants served to engender violence and warfare between the various polities of the Caucasus region. Military violence between polities in this region increased dramatically during the late Middle Ages, not necessarily because of territorial ambitions or political disagreements between nations, but often to obtain captives which could then be sold to the Genoese and other commercial actors for substantial profit.

In Roman law all persons—both domestic and foreign—were innately free persons at birth. The law allowed for persons to lose this freedom and become enslaved under certain circumstances, such as captivity resulting from warfare. It also allowed for the reversal of the process, that is, from the state of enslaved to the state of free person. This legal process was termed manumission and it was a benefit granted by the slaveholder to the enslaved.

Historical research on manumission developed contemporaneously with research on slavery studies from the middle of the twentieth century. The temporal and geographic focus of this research has been on ancient Rome and the modern Atlantic systems, much like the focus of slavery studies as a whole. The seminal work of Frank Tannenbaum compared the slave systems of Brazil and the United States during the eighteenth and nineteenth century with a focus on patterns of manumission. He argued that the clearly codified process of manumission in Roman Law, along with its clear legal definitions of the free and the enslaved, allowed a path to freedom in Brazil that was not available in the United States. Tannenbaum also suggested that the dominance of Roman Catholicism in Brazil “endowed the slave with a moral personality” since canon law defined enslaved persons as persons under law which the Brazilians were then able to freely accept into the Christian fold.[[7\]](#_ftn7) His focus on the convergence of law and religion suggested a largely moral thrust behind manumission—and eventually abolition—a view that Eric Williams had savagely critiqued around the same period. Williams was extremely sceptical about the notion that English abolitionists were driven by solely moral concerns. He argued that they pursued abolition because changing economic conditions had made slavery an unprofitable enterprise. The abolition movement in the nineteenth century was, according to Williams, a means for wealthy English slave owners to divest themselves of their deteriorating investments while enriching themselves through the subsequent compensation payouts legislated by Parliament.[[8\]](#_ftn8) The work of Luigi Tria on Genoese Mediterranean slavery—published around the same time as Tannenbaum and Williams—examined the evolution of the language of manumission in Genoese documents over five centuries. He traced the roots of Roman law in manumission contracts and provided several examples of conditional manumission. Like Tannenbaum he focused on the moral imperative for manumission, suggesting that this legal process reflected the eventual recognition of the inherent humanity of the enslaved by the slaveholder.[[9\]](#_ftn9) Subsequent historians have favored Williams’ methodological approach towards manumission, supplementing the religious and moral thrust of Tannenbaum and Tria with economic analyses that reinterpreted the act of manumission in terms of profit motives. Ronald Findlay suggested that manumission was one of several incentives employed by the slaveholder over the enslaved in order to maximize their economic output. In his view, manumission was just another implementation of social control and not reflective of the moral concerns of the slaveholder or of society as a whole.[[10\]](#_ftn10) Stuart Schwartz demonstrated that the conditional nature of manumission allowed slaveholders to continue to profit from the labour of the formerly enslaved. He examined manumissions in colonial Brazil to demonstrate that, in many cases, the newly freed were contractually obligated to continue to serve their slaveholder indefinitely.[[11\]](#_ftn11) Reflecting the turn towards cultural and anthropological history in the late 1970s, Orlando Paterson reframed the process of manumission as “a classic instance of the anthropology of gift exchange.” His variegated methodology combined cultural, social, and economic analyses to situate the process of manumission within a world historical context of dependency and the “idiom of power” between the slaveholder and the formerly enslaved.[[12\]](#_ftn12) In this analysis the formerly enslaved person and their former slaveholder retained a client-patron relationship predicated upon the ‘gift’ of manumission provided by the slaveholder. Steven Epstein has also recently considered manumission in his study of slavery in Italy. His analysis, rooted in the semiotic theory of pragmatics, suggested that further study of the linguistic patterns in manumission contracts might allow the modern historian “to hear as well as imagine” the thoughts and feelings of the enslaved.[[13\]](#_ftn13) The various promises agreed to by the formerly enslaved to the slaveholder, according to Epstein, offer unique insights into the behaviours and desires of both parties and the attitudes of the enslaved towards their former slaveholder.

This section will examine the process of manumission in the late medieval Genoese Mediterranean through the methodology of capital exchange described in Chapter 1. This analysis will employ the same methodological framework as that used in the analysis of sales, leasing, and insurance contracts. It will demonstrate that manumission was another facet within the larger system of enslavement that permeated all aspects of Genoese society during the century-and-a-half span form the Black Death to the European arrival in the Americas. The approach taken here will have similar multifaceted character as that of Paterson—incorporating aspects of cultural, social, and economic analysis—but with the concept of ‘exchange’ more rooted in economics and social networks than anthropology. The section will begin with a structural analysis of manumission as representing another form capital accumulation inherent in the economy of slavery. This will be followed by an examination of the manumission contract used late medieval Genoa and how it revealed local networks of influence in Genoese society. In particular, the representation of the formerly enslaved and the slaveholder will elucidate the dynamics of power between the two figures, both before, during, and after the act of manumission. An examination of the rationales for manumission and conditions placed upon manumission in these contracts will also illustrate intersections of power, patronage, economics, and morality within the social world of the formerly enslaved. The section will conclude with an inquiry into the social world of the formerly enslaved after manumission.

## 14.2 Granting freedom: the promise of future manumission

The promise of future manumission at some later date is a feature of several sales contracts for enslave men and women. In the spring of 1457, for example, an enslaved Russian woman named Maria held by notary Silvestro Brignole was sold an to the wool-merchant Girolamo de Iugo. The contract modified the standard clause that declared the rights of the buyer over the enslaved by further stating that the buyer held this right for a period of eight years beginning from a specified date, in this case the day of 21 January 1456:

> to have, possess, and use [the enslaved Maria] for eight years beginning on the twenty first day of January in the year 1456 and continuing for the following aforementioned eight years.[[14\]](#_ftn14)

An additional clause was also inserted into the contract. It stated that after these eight years had elapsed, Maria would be freed and that the original slaveholder Silvestro would retain the right of patronage over her. In a second contract enacted in the summer of 1476, an enslaved Hungarian woman named Maria held by Brancaleone Doria was sold an to the commercial agent Tommaso Frugone. Maria would be liberated after seven years according to the conditions of the contract.[[15\]](#_ftn15) In a third contract from the autumn of 1525, an enslaved Turkish woman, again named Maria and held by the blacksmith Illario de Croce, was sold to the silk-merchant Davide de Iordanis. This Maria was to be liberated after term of seven years of service.[[16\]](#_ftn16)

The conditions of future manumission were reflected in the prices specified in these contracts, which were significantly less than the average prices for the respective years. Table 14 compares these three contracts in terms of the cost per year in terms of Genoese lire.

Table 14: Comparison of sales contracts indicating a future manumission

| Date       | Enslaved | Provenance | Price    | Term    | Price/year       |
| ---------- | -------- | ---------- | -------- | ------- | ---------------- |
| 1457-03-21 | Maria    | Russian    | 80 lire  | 8 years | 10 lire          |
| 1476-08-27 | Maria    | Hungarian  | 50 lire  | 7 years | 7 lire 7 soldi   |
| 1525-11-13 | Maria    | Turkish    | 125 lire | 7 years | 17 lire 18 soldi |

What was really happening in these contracts was not a sale but a form of lease. That is, these contracts were sales contracts in name only: in fact, they were structurally analogous to leasing contracts in which the holder of an enslaved man or woman leases out the labour of the enslaved for a specified term and price.

There were 62 contracts that contained a promise of manumission after the term was completed in the dataset of 257 leasing contracts used for this study. This was a considerable proportion—representing nearly one quarter of all leasing contracts enacted between the years 1370 and 1500. The dates of enactment were furthermore distributed evenly across the period in consideration, indicating that such contracts were already a common specialization of leasing contracts for the enslaved by the middle of the fourteenth century and did not represent a later innovation. In the summer of 1387, for example, the lease of an enslaved Albanian named Giorgio and his son Andrea contained a promise of manumission for both the father and son.[[17\]](#_ftn17) The lease of an enslaved Abkhazan named Lucia in the summer of 1449 by the nuns of the monastery of Santo Sepolcro di Sampierdarena likewise contained a promise of manumission at the end of the term.[[18\]](#_ftn18) The promise of manumission was included in the section of the contract that delineated the obligations of the lender. It was the obligation of the lender, therefore, as the slaveholder and *de iure* owner of an enslaved person, to declare him or her as a free person at the end of the contract. In the summer of 1459, for example, an enslaved Greek woman named Margarita held by the physician Antonio de Novis was leased out to the nobleman Soldano Cattaneo for a term of twelve years. After the general statements concerning the obligations of the lender, the contract specified the following:

> ... at the end of the aforementioned twelve years of the present lease the aforementioned Margarita shall and must be free and liberated, both by law and as desired and mandated by the aforementioned Antonio, and [this is] promised to me [the notary]... in the name of the aforementioned Margarita, who is absent...[[19\]](#_ftn19)

In a few cases the leasing contract was based on an earlier contract in which manumission was granted along with an obligation of a term of future service. In the spring of 1456, for example, an enslaved Circassian woman named Lucia was leased out by Antonio Usodimare to the Catalonian merchant Gil Rois for a term of three years. The contract referred to an agreement made between Antonio and Lucia in Caffa during the previous summer in which Lucia was granted her freedom and had promised to serve Antonio for five years. This promise to Antonio also allowed him to sublet her labour. The foreign merchant Gil was described as stationed in Genoa, so it appears that he would not have been transporting her to the Iberian Peninsula, and that she was to work as a household servant for him in his Genoese residence. The contract reiterated that Lucia would remain free at the end of the lease but that she was obligated to serve Antonio for the remainder of the original lease, enumerated with precision as one year, two months, and four days.

Leasing contracts that contained a promise of future manumission represent the penultimate exchange of an enslaved person from one holder to another during the life cycle of enslavement. The final exchange would be the return to the holder at the end of the lease, as it was the holder and not the receiver who was responsible for enacting the manumission. These contracts were thus not usually associated with leases for the purpose of wet nursing described in Chapter 11, which had shorter term and generally enacted within the middle of life cycle of enslavement.[[20\]](#_ftn20) There were nevertheless some cases where an enslaved woman who was leased to serve as a wet nurse was subsequently freed after the term of service. In the winter of 1457, for example, an enslaved woman named Maddalena was leased out by the widowed Maria de Mari to the merchant Federico Centurione for a term of four years. The contract specified that she was to serve as a wet nurse for the children of Federico and that she was to be freed at the end of the contract.[[21\]](#_ftn21) This form of contract was, however, the exception rather than the rule.

## 14.3 Restricting freedom: conditions of manumission

The manumission of enslaved persons in the Genoese Mediterranean was rarely without conditions. There were only eight truly unconditional manumissions in the sample of 308 contracts examined in this study—a proportion slightly greater than two and a half percent. In the winter of 1464, for example, an enslaved Russian woman named Lucia was liberated by the Catalonian merchant Galcerán Adret. The contract contained no conditions and the notary made sure to indicate that Galcerán revoked any future right of patronage over Lucia.[[22\]](#_ftn22) This form of completely unconditional manumission, however, was the exception rather than the rule. Most manumissions thus granted a form of restricted freedom—*de facto* and *de iure*—rather than absolute freedom. This section will outline the conditions made on the manumission of enslaved persons and classify them into three categories: conditions of future service, conditions of monetary payment, and conditions of social control.

### Conditions of future service

The most common condition attached to manumission was the condition of future service. In these manumissions the liberated man or woman promised to continue their service for a specified period. In most cases the recently liberated person agreed to continue in their servile role to their former slaveholder. In the summer of 1456, for example, an enslaved Tatar woman named Maddalena was liberated by the judiciary officer Antonio de Molinariis. The liberated Maddalena promised to continue to work as a household servant for Antonio and his family for one year with an unspecified salary to be determined by Antonio, who would also retain the right of patronage over Maddalena.[[23\]](#_ftn23) In another manumission from the autumn of 1457, an enslaved Russian woman named Maddalena was liberated by the merchant Lorenzo Marchesano. The liberated Maddalena promised to work as household servant for Lorenzo and his family for the next seven years without salary with Lorenzo retaining the right of patronage.[[24\]](#_ftn24)

The condition of future service was generally for a fixed period specified in years, as shown in the previous examples. There are cases where the liberated man or woman agreed to serve for an indefinite period, usually until the death of the slaveholder who granted the manumission. In the autumn of 1464, for example, an enslaved Circassian woman named Lucia was liberated by the merchant Gherardo Lomellini. The formerly enslaved Lucia had been inherited as an item of property by Gherardo from the testament of his father Marco Lomellini. Lucia promised to work as a household servant until the death of Gherardo and for one additional year for his heirs after his death.[[25\]](#_ftn25) She was already forty-two years of age at this point so it seems that she would remain in the Lomellini household well into old age. It appears that Lucia had established strong kinship ties with Gherardo, whom she had probably known since childhood.

There were also cases where an enslaved man or woman was liberated and agreed to a term of future service to some third party. In the spring of 1469, for example, an enslaved Circassian man named Valentino was liberated by the merchant Andronico de Franchi. The liberated Valentino promised to continue to work as a household servant for another merchant named Girolamo Viacava for the next four years.[[26\]](#_ftn26) The notarial source was customarily silent about the reasons for having Valentino serve at the house of a third party, but it was probably the case that the Andronico owed some form of debt to Giacomo that the term of service was intended to cover.

Figure 63 illustrates the distribution of term lengths in manumission contracts that have a condition of future service specified as a finite value. The distribution shows that most of these types of manumissions obligate the enslaved man or woman an average of four or five years of service, although there are some long-term outliers in the twenty-year range. In these cases, the term is long enough as to almost make it indistinguishable from those contracts that bound the liberated person to continue work as a servant until the death of the slaveholder who liberated them.

[ image 704007A1.svg ]

Figure 63: Distribution of the term of future service for liberated men and women in manumission contracts. From the set of 308 contracts enacted from 1348 to 1528.

Most of these contracts also indicated that the future service would be service without a salary. In the spring of 1456, for example, an enslaved Circassian man named Venturino was liberated by the merchant Francesco Stella. The liberated Venturino promised to continue to work as a servant in the household of Francesco for the next five years. The contract also stated that he would agree to serve Francesco on land and at sea, and that he would receive no salary but would receive clothing, shoes, and sustenance.[[27\]](#_ftn27) In this case it seems that Francesco was an itinerant merchant who intended to have Venturino accompany him in his commercial ventures for the next several years.

The late fifteenth century monk and formerly enslaved Georgius de Hungaria described a similar practice amongst enslaved persons in the Ottoman Empire. He suggested that the Ottomans enacted manumissions with a promise of future service as a mechanism to keep the enslaved from flight. He also comments on its illusory nature: granting freedom without the conditions of freedom.[[28\]](#_ftn28) Stephen Whitman came to a similar conclusion in his examination of manumission contracts in the northeastern United States in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, concluding that the use of conditions of future service was motivated by a desire “to forestall flight and secure future uninterrupted service.”[[29\]](#_ftn29) This seems clear in the case of Mediterranean slavery. In the language of capital transfer and accumulation, furthermore, the slaveholder obtained financial, social, and spiritual capital through the manumission, which might be seen as a form of ‘good work,’ while continuing to accumulate economic capital from the continued labour of the enslaved individual. This was essentially a means of having the formerly enslaved reimburse the slaveholder for the original cost of purchase.

### Conditions of monetary payment

The second most common condition attached to manumission was the condition of monetary payment. In these manumissions the liberated man or woman promised to pay the slaveholder a monetary sum for their liberation. This payment generally came from a third-party source—enslaved persons did not generally have large sums of money to pay for their manumissions themselves. In the autumn of 1456, for example, an enslaved Tatar woman named Lucia was liberated by the barber Guglielmo de Lancia. The merchant Giovanni Renza de Cabella agreed to pay the considerable sum of 100 Genoese lire to secure her manumission.[[30\]](#_ftn30) The notarial source was typically silent regarding the rationale for the payment, but it might have been the case that Giovanni and Lucia had some form of existing relationship. In many contracts the payment for the manumission was combined with an obligation to serve that third party for a specified number of years. In the spring of 1470, for example, an enslaved Russian woman named Giacobina was liberated by the barber Simone Cantalupo. The liberated Giacobina agreed to work as a household servant for the *nobiles* merchant Leonardo di Negro for a term of two years and she also agreed to pay Simone the sum of 60 Genoese lire within four years.[[31\]](#_ftn31) The contract stated that her service to Leonardo would not include a salary so it is unclear how Giacobina would obtain this rather hefty sum in just four years. The manumission also noted that if she failed to submit the required payment within four years then she would lose her freedom and return as a captive of Simone, her original slaveholder. The notary is customarily silent about how Simone might reasonably expect to obtain the required payment for the manumission. It might be the case that Giacobina had entered into a marriage agreement and that her future spouse had agreed to help pay for her freedom. This seems to be a likely scenario since Giacobina had already given Simone the sum of 36 Genoese lire to contract the manumission—a sum that she could not have raised from her own unpaid labour. These situations were common in the Genoese Mediterranean. In the winter of 1490, for example, the lawyer Francesco Pammoleo agreed to the marriage of the enslaved Anna, whom he was holding, the merchant Bernardo Scarpa. The agreement came with the condition that the married Bernardo and Anna pay the amount of 70 Genoese lire to Francesco, after which he would declare Anna to be free.[[32\]](#_ftn32)

The granting of manumission for cash payment is yet another means by which slaveholders accumulated economic and financial capital from the exchange of the enslaved. The sums obtained by these slaveholders were often considerable and ensured that they profited handsomely from this event. The act of manumission, viewed through this lens, was not really the delivery of a benefice but another act of profit-taking. Letitia Brown has suggested that the payment for manumission by enslaved Africans in eighteenth century America also served to establish the process as a business transaction rather than an act of charity.[[33\]](#_ftn33) The scarcity of unconditional manumissions in the late medieval Genoese Mediterranean are indicative of a similar process. 

### Conditions of social control

The examination of the social character of enslavement in the Genoese Mediterranean in Chapter 10 illustrated how the close reading of sales and leasing contracts revealed forms of social control implemented on enslaved persons. The conditions placed upon manumissions also implemented forms of social control on the formerly enslaved, whereby former slaveholders could restrict the freedoms of these newly liberated persons.

In the spring of 1382, for example, an enslaved Tatar man named Martino was liberated by the apothecary Damiano de Oliverio and his brother Oliverio. The manumission was made with an extensive list of conditions. Martino first agreed to a daily cash payment of two *soldi* to the brothers, except for Sundays and holidays, for the next eight years. At the end of each month any excess monies held by Martino would be handed over to the brothers who would continue to hold this amount in his name. This money would have come from manual labour, probably in an artisanal workshop, and any position accepted by Martino had to first be approved by the brothers. The contract also specified that Martino was required to live in the home of the brothers, where he would be responsible for providing his own clothing and food, and where he was required to work as a household servant when he was there. He was also forbidden to leave the city of Genoa without express permission of the brothers and, furthermore, he was to abstain from gambling and not commit any theft or associate with thieves.[[34\]](#_ftn34) This rather exhaustive set of restrictions ensured an austere existence for the liberated Martino—when not working as a wage labourer he would be working as a household servant, with his spatial peregrinations and social activities tightly circumscribed by the two brothers.

In another manumission from the spring of 1486, an enslaved baptized Muslim woman named Linor was liberated by the archbishop of Chios named Girolamo de Camulio.[[35\]](#_ftn35) The liberated Linor was bound by the conditions of the contract to remain within the city of Genoa for the next three years and was not permitted to leave the city without the express permission of the archbishop.[[36\]](#_ftn36) The contract did not provide any rationale for imposing this condition but it was likely based on a fear that Linor might revert to Islam if she were immediately allowed to return to Seville and reintegrate into its Islamic community. Girolamo would have certainly baptized Linor as a Christian unless she had already been baptized at some earlier date. The restrictions on the movement of Linor during her first few years of her freedom were likely intended to reduce the probability of conversion back to her original faith.

In the winter of 1440, an enslaved Albanian named Margarita was liberated by the notary Battista de Calestano. The manumission contained a condition that the Margarita must marry within one year or she will lose her freedom.[[37\]](#_ftn37) Laura Balletto speculates that Margarita was pregnant, and that Battista wanted to ensure that her unborn child had a legitimate father. She suggests that the motivation of the holder was to increase the size of his albergo, in which the formerly enslaved woman, her spouse, and their child would be counted among as *familiares*.[[38\]](#_ftn38) It might also be the case that Battista feared that Margarita would opt to flee the city once she was liberated and that this condition would keep her under close control of her former slaveholder.

## 14.4 Taking freedom: by legal and extra-legal means

Manumission by the slaveholder was not the only means by which an enslaved man or woman could obtain their freedom. The enslaved often took their situation into their own hands and actively sought their freedom from their holders. This section will consider the means—both legal and extra-legal—by which enslaved persons could obtain freedom.

### Manumission by petition

The statutory law of Genoa allowed for enslaved persons to petition the state in order to obtain their freedom. They could not do so directly—as they had no legal rights under law—but they could obtain procurators who would then petition the *Officium sindicatorum* on their behalf. The *sindicatores* would hear the petition and afterwards issue their legally binding judgment. The final sentences of these petitions were recorded by the chancellor in the state registers. These remain valuable archival sources but are often brief and provide little information beyond whether or not freedom was granted. The petitions recorded by notaries, however, were much more detailed and often recorded the means of procuration, the arguments of the petitioner and the defendant, and the complete details of the sentence.

The *Officium sindicatorum* was an office held by four men who each served one-year terms. The standard division between the *nobiles*, *mercantes*, and *artefices* was followed in the appointments to the office.[[39\]](#_ftn39) The *sindicatores* adjudicated legal matters and disputes, and since the status of enslavement was legally prescribed, they would be responsible for hearing appeals regarding this status. The men who served as *sindicatores* were often merchants who profited from the market economy of slavery and, furthermore, many of them were slaveholders themselves.[[40\]](#_ftn40) This did not necessarily bode well for enslaved persons who had decided to take the legal route to obtain freedom. They would be facing the judgment of men who had long held notions regarding the validity and legitimation of the slaving enterprise, and their implicit kinship would be towards the slaveholder and not the enslaved. Enslaved persons trying to obtain their freedom certainly realized this on some level, but it did not dissuade many from trying. The process for obtaining a judgment from the *sindicatores* was a three-part process. The enslaved man or woman had to first obtain a procurator. That procurator would then petition the *Officium sindicatorum* on their behalf as their legal representative. After some time for deliberation the *sindicatores* would then issue formal judgment or sentence declaring their verdict on the matter.

The process of obtaining a procurator was also not an easy task for an enslaved man or woman. It required that they first seek out a procurator willing to argue on their behalf, a search that would have had to be done behind the backs of the slaveholder and presumably without their initial knowledge. The person acting as the procurator would have required some form of payment as well, so the process generally required a sympathetic third-party with the means to compensate the persons acting as procurator since the enslaved generally did not have a large quantity of their own money. The examination of some of these petitions will illustrate the difficulties in obtaining a favorable decision for the enslaved.

In the autumn of 1443, an enslaved Albanian named Sofia obtained the services of the notary Giovanni Brignole to represent her in an appeal to the *Officium sindicatorum* to obtain her freedom. Sofia was being held by the widowed Pellegra Calvo, who had been married to the deceased nobleman Opicino Doria. She appeared before the *sindicatores* with her procurator to make an argument against her captivity. The widowed Pellegra appointed Baldassare Lomellini to serve as her representative.[[41\]](#_ftn41) Baldassare was married to her daughter Benedetta Doria and so there was a kinship tie relative to this appointment. But his vigorous activity in the market economy of slavery—having insured forty-seven slaveholders against the death of pregnant enslaved women that they held—must have also factored large in the choice of Baldassare to argue against the freedom of Sofia.[[42\]](#_ftn42)

The four *sindicatores* appointed for that year were Eliano Spinola, Niccolò Antonio Lomellini, Giovanni Giustiniani, and Giovanni Casascio.[[43\]](#_ftn43) Baldassare Lomellini, the representative for the slaveholder and defendant, had strong kinship ties with the two *nobiles* in the O*fficium sindicatorum*. The *sindicator* Eliano Spinola was connected to the Lomellini albergo through his marriage to Argenta Lomellini, who shared a common ancestor with Baldassare. The *sindicator* Niccolò Antonio Lomellini was also in the same albergo as Baldassare and would have likely shared a similar socioeconomic ideology concerning slaveholding. The spouse of the *sindicator* Giovanni Giustiniani also had kinship ties to the Lomellini family. Two of these three *sindicatores* were also attested slaveholders.[[44\]](#_ftn44) In contrast the notary Giovanni Brignole, the representative for Sofia, had no kinship ties with anyone on the *officium*. The sense that the appellants were clearly on the outside of the social network encompassing the defendants and the *sindicatores* must have been real and palpable as they entered the ducal palace to argue their case.

Sofia argued that she was born a Christian and was a resident of the city of Durrës which had been under the dominion of western Christian powers for over a century. She asserted that she was unjustly captured and taken into slavery by Opicino Doria—the deceased spouse of the defendant Pellegra Calvo—who then held her in captivity for twenty years. Sofia concluded that, given these facts, she should be declared a free person. The defendant Baldassare Lomellini countered by arguing that Opicino did not commit any wrongdoing and that Sofia was in fact an enslaved person by law and provided the account books of the deceased slaveholder (but no contract of sale) as evidence. Baldassare also declared that should Sofia be willing to compensate the widowed Pellegra by paying an amount equivalent to the purchase price in the account book of Opicino, then Pellegra would gladly liberate her.

The *sindicatores* issued their sentence approximately six weeks after the initial petition. They recognized the right of Sofia to freedom and declared that she was free by law, but that also declared that she must compensate the widowed Pellegra the sum of 45 Genoese lire as restitution. This amount was less than the purchase price that Baldassare claimed was paid for Sofia, but it was still an immense sum of money for any enslaved man or woman to produce. The sentence was technically a ‘win’ for Sofia, and against strong odds, but the obligation of payment must have marred the sense of victory. The documentation also notes that Baldassare addressed the *sindicatores* again, about three weeks after the sentence. He argued that the newly liberated Sofia was planning to take flight from the city and thus prepared to break her legal obligation to the widowed Pellegra. He requested that Sofia be incarcerated in the debtor’s prison until the entire amount was paid to Pellegra. The notarial documentation ends at this point so the final fate of Sofia is unknown to us.

Table 15 summarizes the conditions placed on formerly enslaved women who were liberated as the result of their petitions to the *Officium sindicatorum*.[[45\]](#_ftn45) There was only one woman in this list who was liberated without any conditions requiring cash payment or future servitude. The women who were successful in their petitions were all—save for one—from lands that were traditional in the realm of Greek orthodox Christianity and that were under the dominion of the Byzantine Empire prior to 1453. The most striking observation, however, is the considerable size of the monetary payments and the considerable length of the required future service. This illustrates that the concerns and sympathies of the *sindicatores* were more aligned to the monetary loss of the slaveholders than the future livelihood of the liberated women.

Table 15: Conditions on enslaved women liberated by the *Officium sindicatorum*

| Date       | Appellant | Provenance | Conditions                   |
| ---------- | --------- | ---------- | ---------------------------- |
| 1417-09-05 | Marta     | Armenian   | 7 years’ service and 50 lire |
| 1418-03-01 | Elena     | Hungarian  | 90 lire                      |
| 1424-09-27 | Caterina  | Greek      | unconditional                |
| 1472-05-01 | Elena     | Hungarian  | three years’ service         |
| 1479-05-04 | Maria     | Hungarian  | 150 lire                     |
| 1479-08-09 | Teodora   | Albanian   | 25 lire                      |
| 1479-10-10 | Anastasia | Albanian   | unknown                      |
| 1480-07-01 | Maria     | Circassian | unknown                      |
| 1480-08-10 | Maddalena | Albanian   | unknown                      |
| 1480-10-02 | Lucia     | Albanian   | 27 lire 10 soldi             |

The legal means by which an enslaved person might actively take their freedom was fraught with implicit and unspoken barriers. This was not a common path to freedom, and for good reason. The requirement of a procurator and the verbal petition before the *sindicatores*, who were aligned in values and connected socially with the slaveholders, greatly diminished the chance for a positive outcome for the enslaved. And when a positive outcome did occur, it was accompanied by conditions that seemed far more sympathetic to the monetary loss of the slaveholder than the social and economic wellbeing—as well as the legal rights—of the formerly enslaved. It is no wonder that many enslaved persons eschewed legal means and saw flight as the more reasonable option to actively obtain their rights and freedoms.

### Liberation by flight

The flight of enslaved persons was a persistent concern for slaveholders in slaveholding societies. The physical geography of the republic of Genoa made this a rather arduous process. The city proper was surrounded by the sea on one side and by steep mountains on the other with only a few narrow passes available for enslaved persons to escape their holders. The result was that enslaved fugitives were less common in Genoa than other locales such as Catalonia, as Domenico Gioffrè notes, where institutions were developed for the express purpose of recovering them.[[46\]](#_ftn46) The phenomenon of flight from slavery was nevertheless a regular occurrence during the period of this study. The concern regarding the flight of enslaved persons was seen in the conditions attached to several sales and leasing contracts described in Chapter 10 that attempted to tightly circumscribe the movements of the enslaved.

The notarial archives contain numerous mentions of enslaved fugitives as the objects of procuration. There were numerous contracts in which a slaveholder appointed a procurator or procurators to recover an enslaved fugitive. In the spring of 1425, for example, the butchers Niccolò Palvania and Giacomo Pipo appointed the lawyer Antonio de Antonis to recover two enslaved fugitives.[[47\]](#_ftn47) The contract does not provide much information beyond the appointment of Antonio and a very brief description of the two fugitives. Antonio appeared to have been an itinerant merchant with his own vessel, so he might have been chosen by the butchers because he was a regular visitor at various Mediterranean ports.[[48\]](#_ftn48) There is also an implicit assumption of some social connection between the butchers and Antonio: it is probable that they lived in the same neighbourhood and that Antonio would have been able to recognize and describe the two fugitives. The two enslaved men were also not in good health: one fugitive was described as having a limp and the other had scars on his face. It seems that they might have fled to escape further physical abuse. There were also cases of foreign merchants appointing procurators to recover fugitives who escaped while they were embarked in the port of Genoa. The Muslim merchant Sad Abinet, who was from Granada, appointed the Genoese merchants Antonio Massola and Lorenzo de Fornari to recover an enslaved fugitive named Barchetta who had fled the vessel owned by Gad while he was conducting business in the city.[[49\]](#_ftn49) These procuration contracts only provide half the story: they do not record whether or not the recovery on an enslaved fugitive was successful.

The Genoese statues proscribed strict punishments for enslaved fugitives—and anyone found to be helping them–as well as rewards for those assisting in their recovery. Any person found culpable of assisting an enslaved fugitive was subject to a penalty of 100 Genoese lire, and if they were unable to pay that, then they would be subject to the loss of one hand.[[50\]](#_ftn50) The enslaved fugitive would also be punished by the cutting of a mark on his or her cheek: perhaps this was the cause of the scarring of the enslaved fugitive who was held by the butchers. The statutes also specified a reward of forty soldi for the return of a fugitive slave captured within the district of Genoa—defined as the city proper and its immediate environs—and a reward of three Genoese lire for the return of an enslaved fugitive captured outside these regions.[[51\]](#_ftn51)

These statutes probably had a greater effect on deterring people from assisting enslaved fugitives than they did on preventing their flight. There were nevertheless some individuals who actively helped enslaved fugitives but not necessarily for altruistic reasons. In the winter of 1443, the notary Battista Stella and his mother appointed the merchant Gabriele de Rapallo to recover an enslaved fugitive named Maddalena. Maddalena was a Circassian woman who had been held by the deceased Cristoforo Stella and had taken flight after his death in the company of the monk from Ferrara named Alberto. Battista and his mother claimed that she was kidnapped by the monk and continues to live with him in Ferrara. Gabriele petitioned the Genoese government to appeal directly to Leonello d’Este, the Marquis of Ferrara, to demand that the curia of Ferrara proceed with a legal investigation regarding these claims.[[52\]](#_ftn52) The outcome of this petition remains unknown, and the motives of the monk Alberto remain unclear. It might seem that he was motivated to help Maddalena obtain her freedom, but if she was still living with him some time later, then he may have had a stronger motivation to keep her as a concubine rather than help her obtain some sort of true freedom. In another example from the summer of 1452, the merchant Teramo Lomellini testified before the *Officium antianorum* regarding an enslaved Circassian fugitive named Zicho. Teramo testified that Zicho had escaped from Genoa the previous autumn and had taken refuge with the viscount Francesco Assereto in a castle in Serravalle, a commune approximately 50 km north of Genoa. Teramo said that he sent a messenger to retake Zicho when he heard of this, but Francesco claimed that Zicho had escaped from the castle just as the messenger had arrived. Teramo was sceptical of this claim and subsequently asked the *antianorum* to write to Francesco and demand Zicho’s extradition, if he was still in his possession, or otherwise provide some form of financial restitution.[[53\]](#_ftn53) The motive for Zicho was certainly liberation by flight, but the motives of the viscount Francesco appear more duplicitous.

## 14.5 Restricted freedom: life after manumission

The fate of the formerly enslaved persons who were manumitted and/or liberated in the late medieval Genoese Mediterranean is difficult to determine. The fate of many would likely be some form of integration into the large swathes of the working poor: the wage labourers who were largely ignored in the documentary record. Iris Origo suggests that most formerly enslaved persons in Florence lived a life of extreme poverty, existing in the margins of society alongside unskilled peasants, prostitutes, and common criminals.[[54\]](#_ftn54) The majority of formerly enslaved persons would continue doing what they had always done: household service or workshop labour. There were few other options open to them. The return to an ancestral homeland might be an option for some young persons who were only enslaved for a short while, but for most enslaved persons in Genoa, who had been held for several decades and often from childhood, the return to a homeland that they barely remembered or recognized might not be so appealing, and the expense to get there would have been beyond the means of most liberated persons. This section will take a brief look at life after enslavement in the late medieval Genoese Mediterranean.

### Social status of the formerly enslaved

The formerly enslaved persons in the Genoese Mediterranean often adopted the surnames of their former holders. In the autumn of 1469, for example, the formerly enslaved Giorgio was named as follows:

> the liberated Giorgio Spinola once the slave of the deceased Eliano Spinola son of the deceased Nicolai...[[55\]](#_ftn55)

In another example from the autumn of 1416, for example, the formerly enslaved Agnese was named in the list of shareholders for San Giorgio as follows:

> Agnese once the slave of Benedetto de Recco...[[56\]](#_ftn56)

The naming of formerly enslaved women in Genoese legal documentation follows the same pattern for the naming of free women discussed in Chapter 3. These women did not directly take the surnames of their former holders like formerly enslaved men. They would also assume the rights of *familiares* as described in Chapter 2. These were a limited set of rights: they would be excluded from most of the privileges extended to other family members, a pattern also with *familiares* in the Venetian Mediterranean.[[57\]](#_ftn57)

The status of formerly enslaved persons in the Genoese Mediterranean was not a permanent one: it could be stripped for several reasons and the person could be returned to enslavement. The manumission contracts discussed earlier contained a set of legally sanctioned obligations which almost always included the statement that the slaveholder would retain the right of patronage. This right ensured that slaveholders were bound to maintain some degree of obligation to the formerly enslaved, such as to provide financial assistance when needed, but it also bound the enslaved to the role of deferent and grateful subjects. The lack of sufficient gratitude towards their former slaveholder—and any form of open hostility or socially unacceptable behaviour—might return a liberated man or woman into slavery. In the spring of 1392, for example, the formerly enslaved Tatar woman named Cristiana was returned into slavery. She had been liberated a few years prior by the apothecary Raimondo Bisaccia and had agreed to serve his family for eight years. The original manumission contract obligated Cristiana to obey the will of Raimondo and not commit dishonest acts during her eight years of service. She confessed to breaking this obligation by having sexual relations with Giuliano de Insula and becoming pregnant: for this transgression she lost her freedom.[[58\]](#_ftn58) The notary was silent, as usual, about the true nature of the relationship between Giuliano and Cristiana. Was it a consensual relationship or was it an instance of sexual assault? The responsibility and blame for the entire affair were placed on Cristiana, however, to her detriment and to the benefit of Raimondo, who retained the services of Cristiana *ad perpetuum* and who would also become the legal holder of her child.

### Manumission and marriage

The events of manumission and marriage were closely linked in the Genoese Mediterranean. Enslaved persons in late medieval Italian states could become legally married—unlike the situation in ancient Rome or early modern America—and they often did, but this was generally accompanied by some form of manumission.[[59\]](#_ftn59) The status of enslavement followed from the mother and it thus in the interests of free men who married enslaved women to ensure that they were liberated soon before or soon after marriage. Elisa María Ferreira Priegue also suggests that many enslaved women in fifteenth century Genoa sought out lonely and widowed men to marry in order to obtain their freedom after the fact.[[60\]](#_ftn60) It may have also been that case that many lonely and widowed men sought out enslaved women to marry when their own value in the marriage market as desirable husbands had diminished.

The manumission of an enslaved woman was also conducted to allow her to subsequently marry a free or formerly enslaved person. This would be a desirable situation for the couple as it would ensure their rights and the rights of their children as free persons. Jacques Heers notes that the usual procedure in late medieval Genoa and most other Mediterranean locales was that the manumission was conducted before the marriage.[[61\]](#_ftn61) In the spring of 1479 the slaveholder and formerly enslaved man named Giorgio Spinola liberated an enslaved Circassian woman named Lucia. The manumission was under the condition that she would work as a household servant for the nobleman Simone Negrone for the next six years.[[62\]](#_ftn62) In the autumn of the same year a second contract of manumission and quittance was contracted that freed the liberated Lucia from the remainder of the six years of service to Simone. The motive of this second contract to allow for the marriage of the liberated Lucia to the merchant Teramo de Ferrari.[[63\]](#_ftn63) Just three hours later a contract recording and legitimating the marriage of the liberated Lucia with Teramo was enacted. Lucia could look forward to a brighter future: personal freedom, a legitimate marriage, and a sizable dowry of 100 Genoese lire, provided by Simone Negrone for whom she was serving the six-year contract.[[64\]](#_ftn64) This newfound freedom and marriage must have seemed like a rebirth to Lucia, becoming a person again after many years as legally sanctioned property. The close reading of this series of contracts and their silences offers some additional insight into the social world of formerly enslaved women. Lucia was liberated *before* she went to the household of Simone Negrone where she would work as a free person and agreed to take a negotiated salary. This suggests that there was no debt obligation from Simone to the slaveholder Giorgio Spinola: in those cases, the labour to the third party after the manumission was free in order to recompense the holder. Simone was also the provider of the large dowry for the marriage, which suggests a strong relationship between him and Lucia. The marriage was conducted in the presence of and alongside two prominent women associated with Simone: his mother Maria and his daughter-in-law Teodora. Simone was well over sixty years of age at the time of this marriage and the liberated Lucia was denoted as being thirty-one years of age in the first manumission contract.[[65\]](#_ftn65) This close and contextual reading of the events of the three contracts leads to one conclusion: Simone was probably the father of the liberated Lucia.

**

The history of life after manumission for enslaved persons in the Genoese Mediterranean remains an understudied part of the history of Mediterranean slavery. The appearance of formerly enslaved persons in the historical record tends towards those men and women who successfully integrated into Genoese society, which was undoubtedly a small proportion of the total population of liberated persons. Most formerly enslaved persons simply disappeared from the historical record by joining the anonymous mass of the working poor. This chapter illustrates that the line between enslaved and formerly enslaved was a blurry one. The granting of freedom by the slaveholder came with numerous conditions that bound the formerly enslaved to their former slaveholders, often for the duration of their lives. The granting of freedom through marriage seemed to be the better path, but the social stigmatization against marrying an enslaved person ensured that this was an uncommon phenomenon. The securing of freedom by legal means was a difficult and costly procedure in which the enslaved faced a system that was socially and systemically opposed to their actions. The securing of freedom by illegal means was dangerous and time consuming for the enslaved person and the legal strictures against supporting enslaved fugitives made it nearly impossible to obtain assistance in this endeavour. And although manumission ensured in the legal status of the formerly enslaved person, the situations in this chapter illustrated that they continued to live in conditions of slavery. The life cycle of enslavement thus rarely ended with freedom: it usually ended with death.

------

[[1\]](#_ftnref1) On the concept of the life-cycle of enslavement, see page 13. The term “social rebirth” is a turn-of-phrase on Orlando Patterson’s concept of “social death.” See his *Slavery and Social Death: A Comparative Study* (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1982). His critical analyses inform much of this chapter.

[[2\]](#_ftnref2) Aristotle, *Politics* (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1932), pp. 18–9, 23. For an overview of classical notions of natural slavery in Aristotle and Plato, see David Brion Davis, *The Problem of Slavery in Western Culture* (Oxford University Press, 1988), pp. 69–72; Elisabeth Hermannn-Otto, “Die Bedeutung der antiken Sklaverei für die Menschenrechte,” in *Unfreie Arbeits- und Lebensverhältnisse von der Antike bis in die Gegenwart: eine Einführung*, ed. Elisabeth Herrmann-Otto (Hildesheim: Georg Olms, 2005), pp. 56–82.

[[3\]](#_ftnref3) Davis, *The Problem of Slavery in Western Culture*, pp. 106–16, notes the caustic influence of Aristotelian thought, particularly after the emergence of new translations in the sixteenth century, on defenses of Atlantic slavery; however, as Eric Nellis has also noted that slaveholders in the Americas did not require or depend on Aristotle to develop unique and damaging legal concepts to justify enslavement that were much stronger than any existing in Europe; see his *Shaping the New World: African Slavery in the Americas, 1500–1888* (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2013), pp. 48–50.

[[4\]](#_ftnref4) The imprint of Aristotelian political thought on classical Roman law should nevertheless be kept in mind.

[[5\]](#_ftnref5) This has been demonstrated in our earlier analysis of sales and leasing contracts where the transfer of an enslaved individual between two slaveholders also entailed the transfer of a matrix of legal rights over them—permanently in the case of sales and temporarily in the case of leases—through the obligations outlined in the *ad habendum* clause.

[[6\]](#_ftnref6) Hans Wieling, *Die Begründung des Sklavenstatus nach* Ius Gentium *und* Ius Civile (Stuttgart: Franz Steiner, 1999), pp. 4–9, especially the discussion of manumission as transition from “res” to “persona.”

[[7\]](#_ftnref7) Frank Tannenbaum, *Slave and Citizen: The Negro in the Americas* (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1947), pp. 91–101.

[[8\]](#_ftnref8) Eric Williams, *Capitalism and Slavery* (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1944), pp. 177–96.

[[9\]](#_ftnref9) Luigi Tria, *La schiavitù in Liguria: ricerche e documenti* (Genova: Società ligure di storia patria, 1947), pp. 33–40.

[[10\]](#_ftnref10) Ronald Findlay, “Slavery, Incentives, and Manumission: A Theoretical Model,” *Journal of Political Economy* 83, no. 5 (1975), pp. 929–32.

[[11\]](#_ftnref11) Stuart Schwartz, “The Manumission of Slaves in Colonial Brazil: Bahia, 1684–1745,” *The Hispanic American Historical Review* 54, no. 4 (1974), pp. 618–9.

[[12\]](#_ftnref12) Patterson, *Slavery and Social Death*, pp. 262–95.

[[13\]](#_ftnref13) Steven Epstein, *Speaking of Slavery: Color, Ethnicity, and Human Bondage in Italy* (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 2001), pp. 86–93.

[[14\]](#_ftnref14) ASGe, Notai antichi 725, Oberto Foglietta, filza 5, series I, nr. 104, dated 1457-03-21, sale by “Silevster de Brignali notarius... vendidit et seu locavit et titulo venditionis seu locationis concessit Ieronimo de Iugo lanerio... quandam sclavam nomine Mariam de progenie Rubeorum etatis annorum triginta in circa... ad habendum possidendum et usufructuandum ad annos octo inchoatos die vigesima prima Ianuarii anni de MCCCCLVI et secuturos usque ad ipsos annos octo... insuper dictas Silvester sciens… elapsis dictis annis octo ex nunc pro ut ex tunc manumissit dictam Mariam licet absentem retento in se iure patronatus...” For details on the implications of the *ab habendum* clause, see the section beginning on page 283.

[[15\]](#_ftnref15) ASGe, Notai antichi 993, Lorenzo Costa, filza 7, series I, nr. 358, dated 1476-08-27, where “nobilis Branchaleo de Auria quondam domini Franci civis Ianue... vendidit et titulo ac ex causa venditionis dedit et tradidit Thome Frugono etiam civi Ianue... quandam ipsius Brancheleoni sclavam vocatam Maria de progenie Ungarorum ut dicitur dicta Maria dicere etatis annorum triginta quinque in circa... de eqaue titulo presentis venditionis faciendum et disponendum pro ut dictas Tomas voluerit per annas septem proxime venturos, quibis annis septem elapsis dicte Maria, respectu dicti Branche remaneat libera et francha...”

[[16\]](#_ftnref16) ASGe, Notai antichi 1665, Niccolò de Coronato Pallavicini, filza 6, nr. 245, dated 1525-11-13, where “Illarius de Cruce faber quondam Baptiste... vendidit ac titulo et ex causa vendicionis dedit et concessit David Iordano seatario quondam Benedicti... quandam sclavam seu servam nominatam Maria de progenie Turchorum partium orientalium etatis annorum triginta trium vel circa... quod statim elapsis dictis annis sex proxime venturis, dicta Maria intelligatur et sit et esse debeat francha, libera, et immunis ab omni servitate, domini, potestate, et exatione tam dictam Davi quam dicti Illarii et heredum suorum...”

[[17\]](#_ftnref17) ASGe, Archivio segreto 1527A, Abazia di San Siro 1316–1653, entry dated 1387-10-02, with the promise “...et in fine dicti termini dictorum annorum octo dictum Georgium et in fine dicti termini dictorum annorum XII dictum Andream liberum ammittere et relaxare, et in eorum libertatem ponere, adeo quod functis dictis temporibus dicti Georgius et Andreas sint in eorum propria libertate et dominio...”; see edition in Tria, *La schiavitù in Liguria*, doc. 22, pp. 152–3.

[[18\]](#_ftnref18) ASGe, Notai antichi 503, Giacomo de Camulio, filza 7, nr. 155, dated 1449-06-12; see description in Domenico Gioffrè, *Il mercato degli schiavi a Genova nel secolo XV* (Genova: Fratelli Bozzi, 1971), p. 266.

[[19\]](#_ftnref19) ASGe, Notai antichi 891, Tommaso Duracino, filza 4, nr. 329, dated 1459-06-21, where “dominus magistrus Antonius de Novis artium et medicine doctor quondam Petri vendidit et titulo vendicionis dedit et consignavit Soldano Cataneo civi Ianue Michaelis... quandam sclavam... nominatam Margarita de progenie Grecorum ectatis annorum decemocto vel circa... ad annos duodecim proxime venturos... quod finito tempore presentis vendicionis seu locacionis dictorum annorum duodecim qua dicta Margarita sit et esse debeat libera et francha ac sui iuris et sic voluit et mandavit dicti domini magistri Antonii, ac promisit mihi notario infrascripto tanquam publice persone officio publico stipulanti et recipienti nomine et vice dicte Margarite et per me dictum notarium infrascriptum eidem Margarite licet absenti, cuique Margarite dedit et dat plenum ius libertatis et franchixie, rectento tamen in se ipsum dictum magistrum Antonium...”

[[20\]](#_ftnref20) See the section beginning on page 305 for details.

[[21\]](#_ftnref21) ASGe, Notai antichi 719, Bartolomeo Risso, filza 5, series I, nr. 332, dated 1457-12-19, where “Maria filia quondam Marci de Mari et uxor quondam spectabilis et egregii legum doctoris domini Dimetrii de Vivaldis tanaquam patrona Madalena eius serve… locavit et penssionavit et titulo locacionis et penssionis dedit et concessit Frederico Centuriono civi Ianue... dictam sclavam pro alunna cum lacte... ad annos quatuor proxime venturos inceptos usque die XX novembris proxime pro tale quale est... idcirco ipsa Maria... finitis dictis annis quatuor dicte locacionis manumissit et frachivit ac a sui dominio et vinculo servitutis penitus liberavit et eximit dictam Magdalenam...”

[[22\]](#_ftnref22) ASGe, Notai antichi 899, Tommaso Duracino, filza 12, nr. 80, dated 1464-03-01, where “Galceranus Adret de Falceto filius Alexandri mercator Catalanus Ianue commonrans, propter multa grata et acepta servitia et benefitia per ipsum habita et receptata Lucia eius sclava sive serva de progenie Rubeorum ectatis annorum vigintiquinque vel circa... manumisit franchivit quitavit liberavit et absolvit, ac manumittit franchit quitat liberat et absolvit ab omni potestate baylia et mandato ac vinculo servitutis ipsius Galcerani... ac sui iuris esse remisso etiam dicte Lucie iure patronatus...” See Chapter 6 for an analysis and discussion of this contract.

[[23\]](#_ftnref23) ASGe, Notai antichi 889, Tommaso Duracino, filza 2, series II, nr. 168, dated 1456-07-22, where “Antonius de Molinariis de Pontedecimo quarilerius civis Ianue quondam Nicolai, propter multa grata et acepta servitia et beneficia per eum habita et recepta, a Madalena eius sclava de progenie Tartarorum, ectatis annorum quadraginta quinque vel circa, et etiam amore Dei... potuit et potest... ipsam Madalenam... manumisit franchivit quitavit liberavit et absolvit ab omni sua potestate baylia et mandato, ac vinculo servitutis... cum hoc et sub hac lege et condicione... quod dicta Madalena teneatur et debeat servire et famulari bene et legaliter ac bona fide eidem Antonio et eius domui et familie anno uno proxime venturo ab hodie numerando pro eo scilicet salario et mercede pro quo seu et qua sibi Antonio videbitur et placuerit...”

[[24\]](#_ftnref24) ASGe, Notai antichi 890, Tommaso Duracino, filza 3, series I, nr. 288, dated 1457-10-22, where “Laurentius Marchexanus civis Ianue quondam Laurentii propter multa grata et acepta servitia et beneficia per eum habita et recepta a Madalena eius sclava et serva de progenie Rubeorum ectatis annorum triginta duorum vel circa et etiam amore Dei.... potuit et potest dictam Madalenam eius sclavam et servam presentem instantem et requirentem manumisit franchivit quitavit liberavit et absolvit ac omni sua potestate baylia et mandato ac vinculo servitutis... cum hac et sub hac lege et condicione... quod dicta Madalena teneatur et debeat servire et famulare bene et legaliter ac bona fide eidem Laurentio et seu domui et familie sue et in eius domo annis septem proxime venturis absque aliquo salario...”

[[25\]](#_ftnref25) ASGe, Notai antichi 916, Giovanni Danove, filza 1, series II, nr. 338, dated 1464-11-13, where “Guirardus Lomelinus quondam Marci tanquam heres pro dimidia quondam Marci patris sui sciens et recognoscens ipsium Guirardum quam plura grata et accepta servitia et beneficia habuisse et recepisse et promisse a Lucia olim serva dicti quondam Marci et nunc serva ipsius Guirardi de progenie Zichorum ectatis annorum quadraginta duorum in circa... potuit et potest dictam Lunam sclavam suam... manumissit franchivit quitavit liberavit et absolvit a manu et potestate ipsius Guirardi ac ab omni mandato et balia ac vinculo servitutis... hac tamen lege et condicione quam dicta Luna teneatur et debeat eidem Guirardo servire et famulari in vita sua et quamdiu vixerit et post vitam ipsius Guirardi heredibus suis anno uno...”

[[26\]](#_ftnref26) ASGe, Notai antichi 917, Giovanni Danove, filza 2, series I, nr. 467, dated 1469-03-10, where “Andronicus de Francis Burgaro civis Ianue sciens et cognoscens quam plura grata et acepta servicia et beneficia habuisse recepisse et percepisse a Valentino sclavo suo de progenie Zichorum etatis annorum viginti quinque in circa... dictum Valentinum... manumissit franchivit quitavit liberavit et absolvie et a manu et potestate ipsius Andronici ac ab omnibus vinculo servitutis... hac tamen lege et condicione quam dictus Valentinus teneatur et debeat et sic promissit servire et famulari Ieronimo de Viacava presenti et acceptatni bene et legaliter vel seu mandavit ipse Ieronimus usque ad annos quatuor proxime venturos et non aliter....”

[[27\]](#_ftnref27) ASGe, Notai antichi 890, Tommaso Duracino, filza 3, series I, nr. 90, dated 1437-03-15, where “Franciscus Stella civis Ianue Baptiste... propter multa grata et acepta servitia et beneficia per eum habita et recepta a Venturino eius sclavo et servo de progenie Zichorum ectatis annorum viginti quinque vel circa et etiam amore dei... dictum Venturinum eius sclavum et servum presentem et instantem et requirentem manumisit franchivit quitavit liberavit et absolvit et a manu et potestate ac etiam ab omni mandato et baylia ipsius Francisci et ab omni vinculo servitutis... cum hoc et sub hac tamen lege et condicione... quod dictus Venturinus teneatur et debeat servire et famulari dicto Francesco vel cui dixerit et commisserit hinc ad annos quinque proxime venturos et tam in mari quam in terra et utique voluerit et ellegerit dictus Franciscus vel alius pro eo absque aliquo salario premio vel mercede, salvo cibo potu vestimentis et calciamentis more famuli...”

[[28\]](#_ftnref28) Georgius de Hungaria, *Tractatus de moribus condictionibus et nequicia Turcorum*, trans. Reinhard Klockow (Köln: Böhlau, 1994), pp. 23–4.

[[29\]](#_ftnref29) Stephen Whitman, *The Price of Freedom: Slavery and Manumission in Baltimore and Early National Maryland* (Lexington: University Press of Kentucky, 1997), p. 109.

[[30\]](#_ftnref30) ASGe, Notai antichi 889, Tommaso Duracino, filza 2, series II, nr. 234, dated 1456-09-24, where “Guliermus de Lancia barberius civis Ianue propter multa grata et acepta servitia et benefitia per eum habita et recepta a Lucia eius serva et sclava de progenie Tartarorum ectatis annorum viginti trium in circa... quod dicta Lucia certo tempore eidem Guliermo et familie sue bene et legaliter servitute et famulata fuit ac etiam actento quod Iohannes Rensus de Cabella quondam Iohannis eidem Guliermo dedit et solvit pro ipsa Lucia libras centum Ianuinorum... potuit et potest dictam Luciam eius servitiam et sclavam... manumisit franchivit quitavit liberavit et absolvit... ab omnia potestate baylia et magistrato ac vinculo servitutis...”

[[31\]](#_ftnref31) ASGe, Notai antichi 904, Tommaso Duracino, filza 17, nr. 535, dated 1474-08-01, where “Simon Cantalupus civis Ianue barberius quondam Simonis propter multa grata et acepta servitia et beneficia et per eum habita et recepta a Iacobina eius sclava et serva de progenie Rubeorum ectatis annorum triginta sex vel circa et etiam amore dei... potuit et potest dictam Iacobinam eius sclavam et servam... manumisit franchivit quitavit liberavit et absolvit... ab omni sua potestate balia et mandato ac vinculo servitutis... cum hac et sub hac lege et condicione... quod dicta Iacobina teneatur et debeat servire et famulari bene et legaliter ac bona fide Leonardo de Nigro quondam Angeli ac domui et familie ipsius Leonardi sive cui vel quibus voluerit et mandaverit dictus Leonardus annis duobus proxime venturos absque aliquo salario premio vel mercede salvo cibo potu vestimentis et calciamentis more famule ac etiam hinc ad annos quatuor etiam proxime venturos det et solvat seu dari et solvi faciat dicta Iacobina ipsi Simoni vel persone pro eo legiptime libras sexaginta Ianuinorum...”

[[32\]](#_ftnref32) ASGe, Notai antichi 999, Lorenzo Costa, filza 13, nr. 765, dated 1489-12-29, where “Bernardinus de Scarpa de Sigestro acceperit per verba de presenti in uxorem suam Annam servam spectabilis domini Francisci Pammolei legum doctoris et dicta Anna accepit dictum Bernardinum in virum suum per verba de presenti et prout ambo confessi fuerunt ac confitentur in presentia mei notarii et testium infrascriptorum et promiserunt ac promittunt sibi ad invicem et vicissim se tractare pro legitimis coniugibus, quod dicta Anna remaneat in dicto matrimonio et vivat cum dicto Bernardino in figura matrimonii et quod dicto matrimonio locus sit, sub ea declaratione quod dicti Bernardinus et Anna et quilibet eorum in solidum remaneant ac sint obligati ad dandum et solvendum ipsi domino Francisco libras septuaginta Ianuinorum... et ita ex nunc solutis dictis libris septuaginta et non aliter eam manumisit ac manumittit et liberavit ac liberat a servitute et dominica potestate...”; see edition in Tria, *La schiavitù in Liguria,* doc. 86, pp. 219–20.

[[33\]](#_ftnref33) Letitia Woods Brown, *Free Negroes in the District of Columbia, 1790–1846* (New York: Oxford University Press, 1972), p. 103.

[[34\]](#_ftnref34) ASGe, Notai antichi 311, Andreolo Caito, register 3, 1380–1400, fol. 13v, dated 1382-04-17, where “Damianus de Oliverio de Rappallo speciarius civis Ianue quondam Antonii meo proprio nomine et nomine et vice Oliverii fratris mei... multa considerans grata servicia mihi et domui mee ac dicto frati meo facta per Martinum sclavum meum et dicti Oliverii de progenie Tartarorum ectatis annorum XX vel circha, et volens ipsi Martino ad remunerationem dictorum serviciorum premiare et in remedium animarum mee et dicti fratris mei... idcircho dictis nominibus dictum Martinum presentem et consentientem sub infrascriptis condicionibus...” followed by a lengthy set of conditions.

[[35\]](#_ftnref35) See Chapter 13 for a detailed discussion of this contract and the adjacent activities of Girolamo de Camulio.

[[36\]](#_ftnref36) ASGe, Notai antichi 821, Andrea de Cairo, filza 41, series I, nr. 140, dated 1486-05-12, where “reverendus in Christo pater dominus Hieronimus de Camulio Dei et apostolice sedis gratia episcopus Chiensis in civitate Ianue residens, dominus et patronus Linoris serve sue etatis annorum decem novem vel circa de progenie Maurorum oriunde Sibilie quam ipse dominus Ieronimus episcopus alias emit a Iohanne Anthonio Cavatia cive Ianue vigore apodisie scripte manu propria dicti Iohannis Antonii anno proxime preterito de mense Augusti... franchivit liberavit exemit et manumissit et a manibus dominio et potestate ipsius reverendi domini Ieronmi episcopi et ab omni servitute et obligatione qua ipsa Linor eidem domino episcopo teneretur et quomodolibet obligata esset penitus absolvit ipsamque Linorem et quascumque liberas suas et ea descendentes natalibus...”

[[37\]](#_ftnref37) ASGe, Notai antichi 653, Branca Bagnara, filza 6, series I, nr. 16, dated 1440-01-12, where “Batista de Callestano notarius civis Ianue... manumissit franchivit quitavit liberavit et absolvit... ab omni mandato potestate et bailia ipsius Batiste... Margaritam sclavam... de proienie Albanorum etatis annorum triginta...” This contract has suffered serious water damage and large parts of it are unreadable.

[[38\]](#_ftnref38) Laura Balletto, “Schiavi albanesi a Genova nel XV secolo,” in *Οι Αλβανοί στο Μεσαίωνα*, ed. Χαράλαµπος Γάσπαρης (Ινστιτούτο Βυζαντινών Ερευνών, 1998), pp. 329–30.

[[39\]](#_ftnref39) These standard divisions that all governmental offices be represented by one half *nobiles*, one quarter *mercantes*, and one quarter *artefices*. See the section beginning on page 48 for additional details. For a summary of the *Officium sindicatorum*, see Valeria Polonio, *L’amministrazione della* res publica *genovese fra Tre e Quattrocento* (Genova: Società ligure di storia patria, 1977), pp. 38–40.

[[40\]](#_ftnref40) I have identified at least 26 slaveholders who also served terms the *Officium sindicatores* during the fifteenth century.

[[41\]](#_ftnref41) ASGe, Notai antichi 557, Giovanni Labaino, filza 10, nrs. 66–68, dated 1443-11-19. See the summary of these contracts in Balletto, “Schiavi albanesi a Genova nel XV secolo,” pp. 330–1.

[[42\]](#_ftnref42) The activities of Baldassare Lomellini in the insurance market are described in detail starting on page 221.

[[43\]](#_ftnref43) ASCGe, Manoscritti 441, Memorie della città di Genova e di tutto il suo dominio 1437–1464, fol. 85r, which notes “anno 1443... sindicatori Eliano Spinola, Nicolò Antonio Lomelino, Giovanni Giustiniano, Giovanni Cassicio...”

[[44\]](#_ftnref44) ASGe, Notai antichi 587, Antonio Fazio, filza 13, series I, nr. 77, dated 1447-05-16, where “Lucas de Fornariis civis Ianue dominus et patronus Lucie eius sclave etatis annorum viginti sex in circa de progenie Tartrorum locavit et pensionavit et titulo locacionis et pensionis dedit et concessit Iohanni Iustiniano quondam Danielis civi Ianue...”

[[45\]](#_ftnref45) ASLSP, Manoscritti 331, La schiavitù in Liguria, register II, fols. 73–74; register IV, fols. 111–113, 117–120; Gioffrè, *Il mercato degli schiavi a Genova nel secolo XV*, pp. 52, 110.

 

[[46\]](#_ftnref46) Gioffrè, *Il mercato degli schiavi a Genova nel secolo XV*, pp. 89–90.

[[47\]](#_ftnref47) ASGe, Notai antichi 489, Lorenzo Villa, filza 3, nr. 279, dated 1425-10-12; see description in Gioffrè, *Il mercato degli schiavi a Genova nel secolo XV*, p. 28.

[[48\]](#_ftnref48) ASCGe, Manoscritti 52, Famiglie popolari genovesi, fols. 29r–v, where “Antonio di Antonio consigliero 1432, 37… anziano 1438… elettor in San Giorgio 1438… capitano d’una galea 1441… consigliero in San Giorgio 1441… quondam Guglielmi 1442...”

[[49\]](#_ftnref49) ASGe, Notai antichi 912, Tommaso Duracino, filza 25, series I, nr. 155, dated 1484-04-09, see description in Roser Salicrú Lluch, “¿Ecos de aculturación? Genoveses en el mundo islámico occidental y musulmanes en Génova en la baja edad media,” in *Genova. Una «porta» del Mediterraneo. Tomo I*, ed. Luciano Gallinari (Genova: Glauco Brigati, 2005), p. 194.

[[50\]](#_ftnref50) Luigi Tommaso Belgrano, Cornelio Desimoni, and Vittorio Poggi, eds., *Leges genuenses* (Torino: Officium Regia, 1901), col. 937, where “si aliqua persona aliquem sclavum vel sclavam ad fugam concitaverit seu induxerit... teneatur dominus potestas Ianue ab illa persona, absque aliqua ordinaria cognicione, aufferre libras centum. Quas si solvere non poterit, manum amittat...Et etiam teneatur magistratus requisitionem domini vel domine sclavi vel sclave fugitivi ut supra, ipsum sclavum vel sclavam marcare seu marcari facere in maxilla...”

[[51\]](#_ftnref51) Ibid, where “Et si aliqua persona sclavus vel sclava, longe a civitate Ianue per decem milliaria iverit sine apodixia domini vel domine ipsius sigillo sigillata, et ipsum seu ipsam acceperit et consignaverit domino vel domine, teneatur dominus vel domina illi sic apprehendenti vel consignanti dare et solvere soldos quadraginta Ianuinorum. Et si captus fuerit extra districtum Ianue et presentatus domino vel domine, habeat libras tres Ianuinorum...”

[[52\]](#_ftnref52) ASGe, Archivio segreto 3034, Diversorum comunis Ianue, filza 14, nr. 51 (formerly nr. 56), dated 1443-03-13, see brief description in Sergej Karpov, “New Documents on the Relations between the Latins and the Local Populations in the Black Sea Area (1392–1462),” *Dumbarton Oaks Papers* 49 (1995), p. 41.

[[53\]](#_ftnref53) ASGe, Archivio segreto 3040, Diversorum comunis Ianue, filza 20, nr. 263, dated 1452-01-20, see the brief description in Karpov, “New Documents”, p. 41.

[[54\]](#_ftnref54) Iris Origo, *The World of San Bernardino* (New York: Harcourt, Brace and World, 1962), p. 103.

[[55\]](#_ftnref55) ASGe, Notai antichi 930bis, Giovanni Guiraldi, filza 1, series I, nr. 202, dated 1479-10-16, where he was named as “Georgius Spinula libertus olim servus quondam Eliani Spinule quondam Nicolai...”

[[56\]](#_ftnref56) ASGe, San Giorgio 14002, Colonne cartulario M. S.L. anno 1416, fol. 40r, where she was named as “Agnetia olim sclava Benedecti de Reto...”

[[57\]](#_ftnref57) Sally McKee, “Inherited Status and Slavery in Late Medieval Italy and Venetian Crete,” *Past and Present* 182 (2004), pp. 45–51.

[[58\]](#_ftnref58) ASGe, Notai antichi 418, Cristoforo Revellino, register 6, 1392, fol. 107v, dated 1392-03-08, where “Christiana de progenie Tartarorum sclava Raimundi Besacie constituita in iure et in presencia domini iudicis et assessoris domini potestatis Ianue habens noticiam et certam scientiam dictum Raimundum ipsam Christianam franchasse liberasse et manumisisse a potestate ipsius Raimundi cum et sub hac condicione videlicet quod teneatur dicto Raimundo vel Raffaeli eius filio servire annis octo tunc proxime venturis bene et legaliter et sibi obedire et inhonesta non committere... et cum vero sit ipsam Christianam inhonesta commisisse dicto Raimundo nam se carnaliter commiscuit cum Iulliano de Insula ex qua cognicione ex eo concepit et gravida est dictusque Raimundus asseruit dictam Christianam inhonesta commisisse et eidem male servisse... confessa fuit se inhonesta commisisse et ob hanc causam renunciavit in totum dicte franchixie et omnibus in ea contentis confitendo se esse servam et sclavam dicti Raimundi dicta franchixia in aliquo non obstante...”; see partial transcript in Tria, *La schiavitù in Liguria*, doc. 24.

[[59\]](#_ftnref59) Epstein, *Speaking of Slavery*, p. 64.

[[60\]](#_ftnref60) Elisa María Ferreira Priegue, “La cesión de bienes a terceros: el recurso de un gallego en la Génova del siglo XV,” *Semata: ciencias sociais e humanidades* 18 (2007), p. 252.

[[61\]](#_ftnref61) Jacques Heers, *Esclaves et domestiques au Moyen Âge dans le monde méditerranéen* (Paris: Arthème Fayard, 1981), pp. 254–5.

[[62\]](#_ftnref62) ASGe, Notai antichi 930bis, Giovanni Guiraldi, filza 1, series I, nr. 171, dated 1479-10-16, where “Georgius Spinula liberus olim servus quondam Eliani Spinule quondam Nicolai et Antonia Siciliana sic appellata, uxor dicti Georgii habitatores Ianue, scientes per multos annos multa suscepisse comoda servitia et beneficia a Lucia serva sua de progenie Zicorum etatis annorum triginta unius vel circa... ipsam Luciam presentem et flexis genibus humiliter supplicantem manumiserunt liberaverunt et franchiverunt ac a potestate dominica sui ab omnique ingo et vinculo servitutis... ac specialiter declarato quod dicat Lucia teneatur et debeat antequam ipsa sua libertate uti ac frui valeat servire et famulari vel in domo nobilis domini Simonis de Nigrono in qua nunc moratus aut alibi, et apud quemvis alium prout eidem Lucie melius placebit per annos sex ab hodie proxime computanduos...”

[[63\]](#_ftnref63) ASGe, Notai antichi 930bis, Giovanni Guiraldi, filza 1, series I, nr. 202, dated 1479-10-16, where “Georgius Spinula libertus olim servus quondam Eliani Spinule quondam Nicolai sciens se manumisisse et a potestate dominica sui liberasse Luciam servam suam de progenie Zichorum cum condicione tamen et obligatione quod servire et famulari deberet in domo nobilis domini Simonis de Nigrono vel alibi prout ipse Lucie placeret per anno sex tunc proxime secuturos... sciens etiam tractatum esse connubium et matrimonium inter ipsam Luciam et Theramum de Ferrariis filium Iohannis de Calavonica et non satis apte posse ipsum connubium firmari stante ipso vinculo servitutis et obliationis quo dicta Lucia famulari tenetur virtute dicti instrumenti...”

[[64\]](#_ftnref64) ASGe, Notai antichi 930bis, Giovanni Guiraldi, filza 1, series I, nr. 202, dated 1479-10-16, where “presens publicum instrumentum universis presentibus et futuris notum sit quod anno mense die ac loco et testibus infrascriptis in presentia mei notarii et testium infrascriptorum, vocatorum et rogatorum constituta Lucia olim serva Georgii Spinule liberti nunc libera ac manumissa, in presentia consensu et voluntate dicti Georgii nec non presente etiam et consentiente Theramo filio Iohannis de Ferrariis de Calavonica et dictis Lucia et Theramo presentibus et intelligentibus causa infrascriptum matrimonio contrahendi... nobilis dominus Simon de Nigrono in presentia mei notarii et testium infrascriptorum promisit et convenit prenominato Theramo presenti ac stipulanti ut supra dare ac solvere eidem Theramo libras centum monete Ianue numerabilis currentis in dotem et pro dote dicte Lucie....”; an edition of this third contract is in Tria, *La schiavitù in Liguria*, doc. 77.

[[65\]](#_ftnref65) ASCGe, Manoscritti 54, Famiglie genovesi, fol. 153r, where it notes “Simone anziano 1435…” and since one had to be the age of majority to serve on the *antianorum* this indicates that Simone was born in 1410 or earlier; ASGe, Notai antichi 930bis, Giovanni Guiraldi, filza 1, series I, nr. 171, dated 1479-10-16, where “Lucia serva sua de progenie Zicorum etatis annorum triginta unius vel circa...” indicating a birth around 1448.