# Part IV Conclusion

One of the more memorable stories in Giovanni Boccaccio’s *Decameron* was that of Bernabò Lomellini and his wife Ginevra.[[1\]](#_ftn1) This pan-Mediterranean tale of deception and revenge follows the peregrinations of Bernabò and Ginevra across the mercantile centres of the late medieval Mediterranean. Ginevra had taken up the disguise of a young man named Siracuno de Finale to escape the threats of her husband and had become enslaved in Alexandria as a servant of the Mamluk Sultan. After many years Siracuno gained the confidence of the sultan and was appointed as the imperial representative for the city of Acre.[[2\]](#_ftn2) This leads to a chance meeting of Siracuno with Bernabò in Acre and ends up in the reunion of Ginevra and Bernabò and a return to Genoa. The story illustrated the intersection of several themes in this study: the geospatial expanse of Genoese merchant networks, the regularity of inter-cultural contacts amongst Mediterranean merchants, and the omnipresence of various forms of slavery alongside these proto-capitalist activities.[[3\]](#_ftn3) It also reflected the reputation of the Lomellini merchant family for slaveholding within the larger Italian literary community. Boccaccio likely expected his fourteenth-century readers to be somewhat familiar with the Lomellini surname and intended its use as a literary device that would signal a certain geographical and thematic frame.

**

The emergence and consolidation of capitalism as a world historical phenomenon has been hotly debated by economic historians for well over a century. Karl Marx situated its consolidation in the late eighteenth century with the early stages of the Industrial Revolution, which he interpreted as the final stage of the transition from feudalism to capitalism.[[4\]](#_ftn4) In contrast the sociologist Max Weber situated the consolidation of capitalism with the emergence of the so-called “Protestant work ethic” and the reformist religious doctrines that reframed labour and economic acquisition as dignified and providential.[[5\]](#_ftn5) In contrast to both Marx and Weber the sociologist Werner Sombart situated the consolidation of capitalism with the commercial innovations and activities of late medieval Italian merchants.[[6\]](#_ftn6) The omnipresence of slavery in the early modern world was largely considered an ancillary phenomenon to capitalism in all these studies.

Eric Williams provided the vital corrective to these omissions in his seminal study *Capitalism and Slavery*. He followed the framework of Marx by situating the consolidation of capitalism during the late eighteenth century and linking it with the triangular trade of the Atlantic slave system and the nascent Industrial Revolution. The economic capital that underpinned eighteenth century capitalism, according to Williams, was accumulated through this triangular trade and provided the financial foundation necessary for the mass industrialization and consolidation of capitalism during the nineteenth century.[[7\]](#_ftn7) He illustrated that capitalism and slavery—as material historical phenomena rather than ideological constructs—were not incommensurable but were instead inextricably linked. Fernand Braudel followed in the path of Sombart by situating the consolidation of capitalism in the market economies of the late medieval and early modern Mediterranean. He acknowledges the importance of labour to capitalism but downplays the role of the enslaved in supplying this labour, stating that “the most important [market]… is the labour market. I will, as Marx did, leave aside the classic case of slavery.”[[8\]](#_ftn8)

This study of the networks of enslavement in the late medieval and early modern Genoese Mediterranean follows Sombart and Braudel by situating the consolidation of capitalism in the fourteenth and fifteenth century Mediterranean, but offers an important corrective by emphasizing the entangled nature of slavery and capitalism as historical phenomena. This study contends that Braudel was correct about the centrality of the labour market in the emergence of capitalism. It supplements his arguments, however, by demonstrating the centrality of slavery to the instruments that structured this market. The leasing contracts for enslaved persons in the Genoese Mediterranean examined in Parts II and III of this study were the unacknowledged forerunners for later employment contracts for journeymen in the early modern era. The insurance contracts for pregnant enslaved women examined in Chapter 7 were similarly the unacknowledged forerunners of early modern life insurance contracts. Braudel also emphasizes the importance of long-distance trade and colonialization in the Mediterranean in the consolidation of capitalism. This study also contends that the primary outcome of these enterprises in the Genoese Mediterranean was to supply enslaved men and women to European markets. It also follows Eric Williams and his illustration that the economic capital accumulated by the British enslavers in the triangular trade provided the foundation for the subsequent Industrial Revolution. This thesis demonstrated the myriad ways in which Genoese slaveholders and the merchants interacting with them profited from the holding and exchange of the enslaved across the life cycle of enslavement. It also suggests that future research should demonstrate that the economic capital accumulated by these slaveholding families provided the foundation for their transition to financiers to the Spanish Crown and for the sixteenth-century Atlantic slaving enterprise. Slavery was the beating heart of late medieval and early modern capitalism. This thesis contends that the two were inextricably linked.

**

The numerous studies of slavery in the Americas have demonstrated its omnipresence in the social worlds of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. Enslaved men and women were encountered as plantation labourers, household servants, fugitives from captivity, plaintiffs in lawsuits seeking their freedom, parishioners in churches, and founders of new communities. The traditional studies of Genoese Mediterranean slavery have emphasized the noble household as its primary domain. The historical sociologist Robin Blackburn reflected this ideal when he characterized late medieval Mediterranean colonialism as “the expansion and prosperity of medieval Europe… to generate some marginal slavery in the Mediterranean world… [and] the rise of commerce and of medieval towns stimulated the trade in slaves as house servants… purchased by the wealthy merchants and landowners of North Italy.”[[9\]](#_ftn9) He also marginalized the exploitation of enslaved persons as workshop labourers as an ‘occasional’ phenomenon that was not particularly commonplace or worthy of extended study. Historians of late medieval Iberian slavery have long rejected this view and their numerous studies have illustrated the presence of enslaved persons in numerous forms of labour. Debra Blumenthal, for example, has documented the presence of enslaved men and women in urban households, rural farms, and artisanal workshops of fifteenth-century Valencia.[[10\]](#_ftn10) This study provides a corrective to the Genoese case by examining the social topography of slaveholding in the notarial contracts of the late fourteenth and fifteenth centuries. The patterns of slaveholding elucidated in Chapter 4 demonstrate that artisans represented over one third of slaveholders and the analysis of Chapter 12 suggests that enslaved men and women laboured in the homes and workshops of these artisans. The patterns of slaveholding elucidated in Chapter 10 also illustrate the presence of enslaved persons in numerous towns and villages of the Ligurian countryside. Enslaved persons in late medieval Genoa were not consigned to household service for elite families, but, as in Iberia, performed numerous forms of household and workshop labour in a wide variety of urban and rural locales as well. Their regular presence in these social spheres was certainly a factor in establishing the Republic of Genoa as a centre of slavery in the late medieval European imagination.

**

The growth and expansion of socioeconomic networks in the late medieval Mediterranean world has long been emphasized by historians as representative of the increasing phenomena of cross-cultural connection and knowledge transfer among its constituent communities and cultures. The contact and sharing of knowledge by the intersection of commercial networks has often been conceptualized as ‘influence’ and this category plays an important role in the work of Charles Verlinden.[[11\]](#_ftn11) But the numerous references to socioeconomic networks in historical literature, as noted by Mike Burkhardt, have often been metaphorical and refer to “nothing more than a couple of relations between a certain person and his/her surroundings.”[[12\]](#_ftn12) Verlinden falls into this trap by positing large-scale knowledge transfer between socioeconomic networks (the ‘Italian influence in Spanish colonization’, for example) through the elucidation of a small handful of examples without any larger scale network or aggregate analysis. This thesis has attempted to seriously engage with the idea of historical network analysis in the study of Genoese Mediterranean slavery. This engagement represents a small first step and further refinement will undoubtedly be required, especially with regards to the actions and influence of enslaved persons who interact with their holders and other members of society within this network.

The analysis in Chapter 8 illustrates that the exchange of enslaved persons from slaveholders outside elite socioeconomic networks to slaveholders embedded within these networks provided an entry point for these outside figures, as well as the enslaved themselves, to instantiate and consolidate social ties within these networks. The act of slaveholding thus provides a key means of entry into socioeconomic networks that had disproportionate influence in the commercial and financial realms of the late medieval Genoese Mediterranean. Taking life insurance on pregnant enslaved women also provided a means by which underwriters could instantiate new ties that would expand their personal networks and reinforce existing ties that would strengthen these networks. There remains much work to be done but these initial steps should provide the foundation for a future large-scale network analysis of slaveholding and the enslaved in late medieval Genoa. This thesis contends that the proper understanding of late medieval Genoese socioeconomic networks must engage with the phenomenon of slavery.

**

The phenomenon of modern slavery has received much publicity over the past two decades.[[13\]](#_ftn13) The organizations that track and study modern slavery suggest that there are more persons living in “conditions of slavery” at the present moment than at any other time of history.[[14\]](#_ftn14) They differentiate modern slavery from historical slavery by emphasizing the roles of coercive bondage and human trafficking and noting that it is not a legally sanctioned phenomenon.[[15\]](#_ftn15) It might appear that modern slavery has little structural similarity to late medieval Mediterranean slavery. This study contends that a comparative study could offer insights into both systems. The requirements of future labour—often unpaid—and monetary payments for formerly enslaved men and women named in manumission contracts studied in Chapter 14 are similar to the conditions faced by persons coerced into modern slavery. The attempts by people forced into modern slavery to take their freedom through legal means or through flight also present interesting parallels to similar activities in the late medieval Genoese Mediterranean. There is much additional work to be done here, and this study contends that future engagement with the phenomenon of modern slavery could open new conceptual and methodological insights into late medieval Mediterranean slavery and vice versa.

**

This study was based on a close, careful, contextual, and aggregate analysis of the notarial contracts that structured the market economy of slavery and provided the connective tissue to the commercial networks of the Genoese Mediterranean. It demonstrated that these notarial contracts, when examined with care, can provide additional insights into networks of slavery and enslavement beyond the quantitative and legal data contained within them. The examination of contracts in an aggregate manner demonstrated that the social landscape of late medieval Genoese slaveholding was far more diverse and wider in scope than previously assumed. The enslaved were omnipresent in this period: in noble households and artisan workshops, held by both men and women, living in cities and towns across the entire Republic of Genoa. This collective examination also demonstrated the dynamics of the market economy of slavery, the development of new instruments to profit from the exchange of the enslaved, and the continual strength of this economy throughout the period in question. The places of origin of named slaveholders demonstrated the importance of the city of Genoa as a geospatial node of exchange that connected multiple overlapping Mediterranean networks of slavery. The emergence of a new form of life insurance for enslaved pregnant women offered insights into the social perils and abuse faced by the enslaved and illustrated another means through which Genoese merchants accumulated financial capital through the phenomenon of slaveholding. The market economy of slavery provided an effective means for slaveholders to instantiate crucial social ties and expand their social networks in the late medieval Mediterranean throughout the period.

The analysis of these notarial contracts also offers additional and often overlooked insights into the social landscape of enslaved persons in the late medieval Genoese Mediterranean. The life cycle of enslavement was punctuated by several events recorded in these notarial contracts that provide glimpses into the everyday life and precarious existence of these men and women. They reveal that the enslaved were afflicted by various ailments and were often subjected to a strict form of social control that regulated their movement and behaviour. The close reading of these contracts reveals that while enslaved women were subject to sexual exploitation from their holders, many women managed also to enter into relationships on their own accord. Enslaved persons laboured as household servants and wet nurses for nobles and professional artisans, were present as servants in monasteries, and toiled in the industrial workshops of Genoa and its surrounding regions. The possibility of freedom was real: it could be granted by the slaveholder or taken by the enslaved.

The notarial contracts that formed the basis of this study represented the voices and ideologies of the slaveholders. There remains much work to be done to uncover to shift away from the structural logic of the slaveholding enterprise embedded in these sources to hidden voices of enslaved men and women in the Genoese Mediterranean. This thesis is a small and very incomplete step in this direction and represents the preliminary foundation to what I hope will become a more sophisticated and contextual analysis.
 

------

[[1\]](#_ftnref1) Giovanni Boccaccio, *The Decameron* (New York: W. W. Norton and Company, 2013), pp. 174–87. It is intriguing to speculate if Boccaccio had modeled his characters on specific members of the Lomellini family. Although there is no record of a Bernabò Lomellini in the fourteenth century, there is one Ginevra who lived to adulthood. She was from the Doria family and was married to a certain Giorgio Lomellini. The tale was the basis for several similar fables in the early modern era, in particular Shakespeare’s *Cymbeline* (1611).

[[2\]](#_ftnref2) The minute details of this complex and fascinating story are too long to relate here. It is highly recommended reading for anyone interested in the cultural significance of late medieval Mediterranean commerce.

[[3\]](#_ftnref3) The tale also illustrates aspects of late medieval gender dynamics in elite Italian families. For example, see the analysis of Valerie Hotchkiss, *Clothes Make the Man: Female Cross Dressing in Medieval Europe* (London: Routledge, 2012), pp. 89–92.

[[4\]](#_ftnref4) Karl Marx, *Capital: A Critique of Political Economy*, ed. Friedrich Engels, trans. Edward Aveling, Samuel Moore, and Ernest Untermann (Chicago: Charles Kerr and Company, 1906). Marx ignored the centrality of Atlantic slavery and the idea of slavery was in *Capital* was largely metaphorical, used to describe the situation of the proletariat worker within systems of capitalist production (in particular, see parts IV and VIII).

[[5\]](#_ftnref5) Max Weber, *The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism*, trans. Talcott Parsons (New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1958). Weber also ignored the omnipresence of slavery in the early modern period. His brief mentions of the phenomenon in this study were references to ancient Roman slavery.

[[6\]](#_ftnref6) Werner Sombart, *Der moderne Kapitalismus: historisch-systematische Darstellung des gesamteuropäischen Wirtschaftslebens von seinen Anfängen bis zur Gegenwart* (München: Duncker und Humblot, 1919). Sombart also marginalized the role late medieval and early modern slavery although he briefly acknowledged the central role of slavery in providing galley labour for Genoese and Venetian galleys and in driving the late medieval and early modern colonial enterprise (in particular, see pp. 332, 346, and 442 of volume I).

[[7\]](#_ftnref7) Eric Williams, *Capitalism and Slavery* (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1944), especially pp. 98–134.

[[8\]](#_ftnref8) Fernand Braudel, *Civilization and Capitalism, 15th–18th Century*. *Volume II: The Wheels of Commerce* (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1982), p. 49.

[[9\]](#_ftnref9) Robin Blackburn, *The Making of New World Slavery: From the Baroque to the Modern, 1492–1800* (London: Verso, 1998), pp. 54–5.

[[10\]](#_ftnref10) Debra Blumenthal, *Enemies and Familiars: Slavery and Mastery in Fifteenth-Century Valencia* (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 2009), pp. 80–121.

[[11\]](#_ftnref11) The idea of influence and knowledge transfer are scattered throughout the essays collected in Charles Verlinden, *The Beginnings of Modern Colonization. Eleven Essays with an Introduction*, trans. Yvonne Freccero (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1970).

[[12\]](#_ftnref12) Mike Burkhardt, “Networks as Social Structures in Late Medieval and Early Modern Towns: A Theoretical Approach to Historical Network Analysis,” in *Commercial Networks and European Cities, 1400–1800*, ed. Andrea Caracausi and Christof Jeggle (London: Pickering and Chatto, 2014), p. 13.

[[13\]](#_ftnref13) My personal reading into the prevalence of modern slavery, particularly the wrenching narrative provided in Siddharth Kara, *Sex Trafficking: Inside the Business of Modern Slavery* (New York: Columbia University Press, 2009), was the primary reason I decided to abandon my focus on Geneose intellectual and economic history and shift my study to late medieval Genoese slaving networks.

[[14\]](#_ftnref14) Kevin Bales, Zoe Trodd, and Alex Williamson, *Modern Slavery: The Secret World of 27 Million People* (Oxford: Oneworld, 2009), p. 146, although the authors also note that our present moment has “the smallest ever proportion of the global population… in slavery.”

[[15\]](#_ftnref15) Alison Marie Behnke, *Up for Sale: Human Trafficking and Modern Slavery* (Minneapolis: Lerner Publishing Group, 2014), pp. 6–7.