# Chapter 4 The social topography of slavery: social trends of slaveholding in the Genoese Mediterranean

This chapter will begin the analysis of slaveholding and slaveholders in late medieval Genoa by considering their social topography in contracts related to the exchange and exploitation of enslaved persons. A careful identification of the men and women named as slaveholders in sales, leasing, insurance, and manumission contracts according to the legally demarcated social categories of *nobiles*, *mercantes* and *artefices* will elucidate the social landscape of slaveholding through a socioeconomic lens. An analysis of these results will challenge the notion that enslaved persons in late medieval and early modern Genoa were largely held and exchanged between men from noble merchant families. The phenomenon of slaveholding instead encompassed both men and women from across the socioeconomic landscape.

## 4.1 Slaveholding and social status

The Casa di San Giorgio collected two taxes related to the holding and exchange of enslaved persons under the umbrella of the *cabelle sclavorum*. The first was a point-of-sale tax levied on the sale of enslaved persons. The second was an annual property tax assessed on slaveholders*.* The documentation recording the collection of these gabelles has largely disappeared. There are only four remaining registers in the archives that provide an accounting for these taxes: three registers describe the sales tax and fourth describes the tax for possession. The first tax levied on the sale of the enslaved was paid in equal parts by the buyer and the seller. From 1413 to 1420 this tax was 2½ Genoese lire for each contracting party, rising to approximately 3¼ lire for the period 1447 to 1453.[[1\]](#_ftn1) The second tax levied on the possession of the enslaved was a form of annual property tax. The only extant register for this tax is for the period 1459 to 1463 and specify a sixteen soldi tax per each enslaved individual, an amount slightly greater than three-quarters of a lire.[[2\]](#_ftn2) Along with this financial data, the second register provides crucial information on the individuals who held enslaved persons during the four-year period of its records. This valuable source has been used to significant effect by Domenico Gioffrè and Charles Verlinden in their studies on Genoese slavery.[[3\]](#_ftn3) The sales, leasing, insurance, and manumission contracts enacted by Genoese notaries provide an important yet sometimes overlooked supplementary source to this register, providing information regarding patterns of slaveholding after the point of sale in late medieval Genoa.[[4\]](#_ftn4)

The analysis in this section is based upon the close, contextual, and collective examination of notarial contracts and the careful identification of slaveholders in these contracts according to the social categories in the following table.

Table 6: Analytical categories for social status and slaveholding

| Category       | Description                                                  |
| -------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
| *nobiles*      | Citizens from legally defined noble families.                |
| *mercantes*    | Citizens from legally defined popular merchant families.     |
| *artefices*    | Citizens from legally defined popular artisan families.      |
| foreign        | Foreign merchants who are not citizens of Genoa or its colonies. |
| ecclesiastical | Any persons who work as ecclesiastics (in churches and monasteries) |

See Chapter 3 for a detailed description of these categories.[[5\]](#_ftn5) Figure 5 illustrates the distribution of persons named as sellers and buyers of enslaved persons in contracts enacted in Genoa between 1348 and 1528 according to the social categories outlined in Table 6.

[ image 701002A3.svg ]

Figure 5: Sellers and buyers in sales contracts by social category, 1348–1528. From the dataset of 632 sales contracts recorded by Genoese notaries.

Several patterns are immediately apparent in this chart. The nobility, first of all, were at the forefront of the trade of enslaved persons—both as sellers and as buyers—which is probably not much of a surprise. The strong presence of foreign merchants, particularly as buyers, also demonstrates that Genoa was not just a terminal node for the Mediterranean slave trade, but also represented an additional node of redistribution where enslaved persons were exchanged and transported further westwards. Men and women from *populares* families were also predominant in both ends of the trade, which counters the lingering narrative of the Genoese slave trade being dominated by the noble families. The significant presence of transactors from *artefices* families as buyers and sellers also counters the traditional narrative of slaveholding as a practice of wealthy merchants in late medieval Italy. These trends will be examined in detail in subsequent chapters.

Figure 6 illustrates the distribution of persons named as lenders and receivers of enslaved persons in contracts enacted in Genoa in the years from 1370 to 1500 according to the social categories outlined in Table 6.

[ image 702002A2.svg]

Figure 6: Lenders and receivers in leasing contracts by social category, 1370–1500. From the dataset of 257 leasing contracts recorded by Genoese notaries.

There are many similarities between the patterns of buying and selling enslaved persons in Figure 5 to the patterns of leasing and receiving enslaved persons in Figure 6. There are also some marked divergences. The presence of foreign merchants in leasing contracts, first of all, is rather muted. Their significant presence in sales contracts—having represented almost one-quarter of all persons named as buyers—does not carry over to leases, where they only represented about five percent of participants. This suggests that the market for leasing enslaved persons was primarily a local market. In this local commercial space, the presence of men and women from *artefices* and *mercantes* families (the popular families) represented a sizable proportion in both ends of the trade, which again counters the traditional narrative of the market economy of slavery being dominated by the *nobiles* families. The presence of transactors from *artefices* families remains surprisingly strong in leasing contracts: the lender or receiver of an enslaved man or woman in a leasing contract was almost as likely to be an urban artisan or professional as a noble merchant.[[6\]](#_ftn6)

Figure 7 below illustrates the distribution of underwriters and purchasers of insurance for enslaved women in contracts enacted in Genoa in the years from 1400 to 1510 according to the social categories outlined in Table 6.

[ image 704003A1.svg ]

Figure 7: Underwriters and buyers of insurance by social category, 1400–1510. From the dataset of 222 leasing contracts recorded by Genoese notaries.

Several patterns are immediately apparent. The predominance of noble merchants as underwriters was striking and seems to confirm an important part of the thesis proposed by the economic historian Quentin van Doosselaere, namely that *nobiles* families dominated the fifteenth century Genoa insurance market.[[7\]](#_ftn7) Individuals from *nobiles* families were named as underwriters in almost eighty percent of the contracts sampled for this study. They also purchased the greatest proportion of insurance against enslaved pregnant women, being named as over forty percent of buyers.

The participation of foreign merchants appeared moderately robust, but these acts of underwriting were skewed by the dominance of a single elusive figure by the name of Pellegro Sucha, who will be discussed in Chapter 6.[[8\]](#_ftn8) Men and women from *artefices* families—who had a significant presence in sales and leasing contracts related to the exchange of enslaved persons—were much less active in the insurance market. They did not participate in the underwriting of contracts at all, although they did purchase insurance on more than a few occasions.

The study of manumission contracts by historians has offered insights into the language and legal nature of manumission, but these contracts have been overlooked as supplementary sources on the ownership of the enslaved in the late medieval period.[[9\]](#_ftn9) An examination of the persons named as the former slaveholders of the formerly enslaved provides an additional layer of archival evidence regarding the distribution of ownership and manumission and the relationship between these activities. These contracts are often the only source, furthermore, that document the existence of certain enslaved persons, or that certain individuals and families held enslaved persons. In the summer of 1456, for example, the barber Guglielmo de Lancia liberated an enslaved Tatar woman named Lucia.[[10\]](#_ftn10) This is the only document we have (as of yet) that shows someone from this *artefices* family having held an enslaved person.

Figure 8 illustrates the socioeconomic distribution of slaveholders specified in manumission contracts.

[ image 704000A2.svg ] 

Figure 8: Socioeconomic distribution of owners of enslaved persons in manumission contracts. From the subset of 308 contracts recorded by Genoese notaries.

The predominance of the noble families in manumissions is an expected trend and corresponds to their primacy as holders of enslaved persons in sales, leasing, and insurance contracts. There are, however, a few distinct and unexpected trends. First, men and women from *artefices* families were more active in manumission of the enslaved than one might expect, especially given the historiographical trope that the purchase of enslaved persons was only economically feasible for the wealthy noble families of late medieval Italian communes.[[11\]](#_ftn11) Second, given the vigorous activity of men and women from *mercantes* families in other aspects of the market economy of slavery,[[12\]](#_ftn12) their participation in the manumission of the enslaved seem lower than expected. This low representation nevertheless corresponds to their similarly low representation in the insurance data. There are two possible explanations for this pattern. The first is that men and women from *mercantes* families were less predisposed to insure or manumit their enslaved than other social groups, but there is no evidence to support this speculation. The second and likely explanation is that these men and women did not tend to hold enslaved persons for the longer term like persons from *nobiles* and *artefices* families. This would explain their predominance in the sales of the enslaved: while most men and women from *nobiles* and *artefices* families purchased the enslaved for their own purposes—to labour in workshops or to exploit in domestic service for the longer term—the purchases of enslaved by the men and women from *mercantes* families were largely for the purpose of a short-term resale. The *mercantes* families did not generally reside in large multi-family houses like the *nobiles* families—and they were in general more itinerant than persons from *nobiles* and *artefices* families—so they did not have as much use for permanent household servants. There was little place in their social group, furthermore, for the exploitation of enslaved labour. Enslaved persons were useful and employed in the menial and heavy labour required in the workshops of the *artefices*, but in general no similar form of labour was generally required for the itinerant merchant.

## 4.2 Women as slaveholders

The Genoese Mediterranean was a patriarchal society, and as such, men dominated the activities of the commercial sphere. This is an expected phenomenon given the increasingly paternal structure of the late medieval European family. Loredana Garlati attributes this increasing paternalism in part to the revival of Roman law in the late Middle Ages which strengthened the notion of *paterfamilias* as a form of executive power over family life.[[13\]](#_ftn13) It is no surprise, therefore, to see that the majority of slaveholders named in sales, leasing, insurance, and manumission contracts were men. But there were women who also participated in the market economy of slavery despite the societal and legal constrictions against their participation.

The analysis in this section is based upon the close examination and careful identification of the women slaveholders who participated in sales, leasing, insurance, and manumission contracts. This will be followed by an examination of the special roles of widows in the commerce of enslaved persons and the women who served as procurators in contracts related to slavery.

[ image 701005A3.svg ]

Figure 9: Proportion of women named in 632 sales contracts for the enslaved enacted in Genoa from 1348 to 1528 and their distribution amongst the three legally designated social categories.

Figure 9 illustrates that the proportion of women attested as slaveholders in sales contracts for the enslaved was small but not necessarily insignificant. There were numerous instances of women named as buyers and sellers of the enslaved. In the winter of 1453, for example, the widowed Limbania Lomellini sold an enslaved Russian woman named Maddalena to nobleman Ambrogio de Carretto.[[14\]](#_ftn14) In another example from the summer of 1457, the merchant Baldassare Negrone sold an enslaved Bosnian child named Maria to the noblewoman Peretta Doria.[[15\]](#_ftn15) A final example from the winter of 1492 provides an instance where both principals were women. In this sales contract, the slaveholder Luchina de Spigno sold an enslaved baptized Muslim named Caterina to noblewoman Marietta Spinola.[[16\]](#_ftn16) Limbania, Peretta, and Marietta were all women from major *nobiles* families—in fact, from the three largest *nobiles* families of the fifteenth century.

Figure 9 also reveals some important trends regarding women and their participation in the commerce of the enslaved. Women represented approximately five percent of overall transactors, but they were more than twice as likely to be attested as sellers rather than buyers. An important causal factor for this divergence was that most women named as sellers were widowed. The contracts did not record any rationale for these sales, but it appears that the recently widowed women no longer needed, no longer wanted, or could no longer afford to hold enslaved women as domestic servants. If an enslaved woman had been sexually exploited by her deceased spouse as a concubine, for example, then the widow might not have wanted to have her around the household after his death. The financial proceeds from selling these enslaved persons would also allow these widows to consolidate new dowries for themselves in preparation for a second marriage. Another key factor for this divergence was that over ninety percent of sellers who were women were from wealthy *nobiles* and *mercantes* families. Women from the *artefices* were active participants in the commerce of enslaved persons, but their activities were primarily focused on purchases: women from *artefices* families represented about one-quarter of all purchases of the enslaved made by women. The data also suggests that women slaveholders from *artefices* families tended to retain enslaved persons rather than sell them after the death of their spouses. This trend reflects the forms of labour that the enslaved were forced to perform: women held by *nobiles* and *mercantes* households were generally exploited as household servants, whereas women held by the *artefices* were exploited as industrial labourers as well as household labourers.[[17\]](#_ftn17)

The participation of women in the market economy of slavery, as mentioned earlier, was constricted by legal and cultural traditions that ensured the increasing domination of men in this endeavour. Women were most active in this commercial space in situations, for the most part, where men were physically absent, although there were some instances of women acting independently. This independent participation of women in their local economy was echoed in a famous paper by Joan Kelly, who argued that women were vigorous actors within the socioeconomic and political spheres during the later Middle Ages, particularly women in religious orders and elite women during the absence of their spouses.[[18\]](#_ftn18) Lluís Tudela Villalonga has likewise suggested that women were more active in the commercial spheres of cities in which elite men had gravitated towards long-distance commerce—cities like Genoa and Palma de Mallorca.[[19\]](#_ftn19) The vast proportion of attested women—about ninety percent—were thus widows, nuns, or served as procurators for their absent spouses. Figure 10 illustrates how women were attested in sales contracts for the enslaved.

[ image 701006A1.svg ] 

Figure 10: Attestation of women as transacting parties in sales contracts of the enslaved. From the subset of 40 women attested as buyers and 77 women attested as sellers in sales contracts.

There were also some women who participated in the leasing of enslaved men and woman in the same manner as they had in sales contracts, that is, as both leasers and receivers of enslaved persons. In the summer of 1462, for example, the widowed Argentina Carrega leased out an enslaved Circassian man named Giorgio to the merchant Niccolò de Varixio for a term of six years.[[20\]](#_ftn20) In another example from winter of 1474, the merchant Cristoforo de Iudice leased out an enslaved Russian woman named Caterina to the noblewoman Bartolommea Marchione for a term of twelve years.[[21\]](#_ftn21) A final example from the winter of 1492 provides an instance where both principals were women and from the same *nobiles* albergo. In this leasing contract the noblewoman Lucia Spinola leased out an enslaved Abkhazan named Maria to the noblewoman Teodorina Spinola, for a term of twenty years.[[22\]](#_ftn22)

Figure 11 illustrates that the attestation of women as transactors in leasing contracts was minimal but significant and at a higher number that in sales contracts. The figure also reveals some additional trends regarding women and their participation in the commerce of the enslaved. The distribution shows that women were more than twice as likely to be attested as lenders rather than receivers of enslaved persons in late medieval Genoa. About four-fifths of women named as lenders, furthermore, were also denoted as widows. As with sales contracts involving recently widowed women, it also appears that these women no longer needed, no longer wanted, or could no longer afford to hold enslaved persons as domestic servants. But rather than exchange them through sales contracts, these widows decided to lease them to third parties, thus exploiting their labour to generate income without losing their legal hold over the enslaved.

[ image 702005A2.svg ] 

Figure 11: Proportion of women named in 257 leasing contracts for the enslaved enacted in Genoa from 1370 to 1500 and their distribution amongst the three legally designated social categories.

There are, however, some striking divergences between the participation of women in leasing contracts shown above and the participation of women in sales contracts shown in Figure 10. About twice the number of women were attested on both sides of the contractual equation in leasing contracts as compared to sales contracts. Women from *populares* families, and especially those from *artefices* families, also participated to a significantly greater degree as lenders than they did as sellers. They represented a mere sliver of named sellers in sales contracts—less than seven percent—but they were highly active in leasing out enslaved persons, representing close to forty percent of named lenders. The reason for the divergence between the patterns of slaveholding in selling and leasing contract can be explained by considering the rationale for many of these leases: so that enslaved women might serve as wet nurses. This phenomenon will be discussed in greater detail in Chapter 11.[[23\]](#_ftn23)

Women slaveholders were also active in purchasing insurance against death from childbirth for enslaved women. In the summer of 1453, for example, the recently widowed Francesca Lomellini purchased insurance from the underwriter Cattaneo Grimaldi for an enslaved Circassian woman named Margarita, who was approximately five months pregnant.[[24\]](#_ftn24) A few decades later, in the autumn of 1492, another slaveholder from the Lomellini family named Margarita purchased insurance from the underwriter Marcello Galliano for an enslaved baptized Muslim child named Maddalena, who was just fifteen years of age at the time of her pregnancy.[[25\]](#_ftn25) In the majority of cases, however, it was the patriarchs of the family that were specified as buyers in these insurance contracts. The women in the two examples above were widows and as such were able to act on their own accord. Figure 12 illustrates the participation of women in insurance contracts by proportion and by social category.

 [ image 703001.A2.svg ]

Figure 12: Proportion of women named in 222 insurance contracts for the enslaved enacted in Genoa from 1400 to 1510 and their distribution amongst the three legally designated social categories.

The distribution again illustrates that men dominated this facet of the market economy of slavery, which is no surprise. There is, however, one noticeable divergence between the participation of women in insurance contracts as compared to their participation in sales and leasing contracts.[[26\]](#_ftn26) Women were twice as likely to be attested as principals in insurance contracts than they were in leasing contracts and three times more likely than they were in sales contracts. It might be tempting to suggest that women took a more active role in the economy of slavery in the later stages of the life cycle of enslavement as a result of some sense of solidarity with the enslaved persons held by their families. This is an overly optimistic interpretation. The more sobering reality is that men were generally much older than their female spouses and women became increasingly involved in the economy of slavery simply because they were widowed.

This trend is shown in Figure 13 which illustrates how women were attested in insurance contracts for the enslaved. Most women who purchased insurance were widowed with only a small proportion who were acting as independent principals. If we exclude monastic women from the category of independent actors, then the proportion of women who acted on their own accord was less than five percent.[[27\]](#_ftn27)

[ image 703008A1.svg ]

Figure 13: Attestation of women as purchasers in insurance contracts of the enslaved. From the dataset of 222 insurance contracts enacted during the period 1400–1510.

The men and women from wealthy *nobiles* and *mercantes* families, as discussed earlier, were named as slaveholders in two-thirds of manumissions in contracts used in this study.[[28\]](#_ftn28) A closer examination of the slaveholders named as principals in these contracts reveals some additional trends around elite manumission. The proportion of elite women attested as owners of the enslaved in manumission contracts, first of all, is greater than twenty percent. This is a much greater proportion than women transactors in other contracts relating to the enslaved. Figure 14 illustrates the proportion of elite women as transactors in the four major types of notarial contracts related to the enslaved in Genoa during the period of our study.

[ image 700008A3.svg ]

Figure 14: Elite women as transactors in notarial contracts relating to enslavement. From the dataset of 1836 contracts recorded by Genoese notaries.

The chart reveals a definite and progressive temporal trend. The data illustrates that participation of Genoese women in the economy of slavery increased proportionally to the temporal position of the enslaved in the life cycle of slavery.[[29\]](#_ftn29) In the initial stages of this cycle, when the enslaved commonly appeared as the objects of sales contracts, the proportion of women as transactors was about five percent. At the last stage of the life cycle—with the manumission contract that marked its supposed end—the proportion of women as transactors was greater than twenty percent. The participation of women in contracts along the timeline has an almost exponential trend, although it is difficult to speculate the precise causes behind this progression. It is reasonable to assume, however, that many manumissions contracted by women occurred after the death of their husband, and this was the case in eighty-six percent of manumission contracts in this study.[[30\]](#_ftn30) In some cases the widow might have experienced a significant loss of income, making it more difficult for her to support enslaved household servants, who had to be housed, fed, and clothed. The sexual exploitation of enslaved women by the men who held them was a legally and socially sanctioned phenomenon, and as such, it is also possible that the manumission of these enslaved women by widows was driven by a desire to remove them from the household, and even perhaps indicative of some form of empathetic solidarity.

### Widows in the market economy of slavery

The death of a spouse was one means by which women were able to freely participate in late medieval commercial world. Barbara Hanawalt notes that many widowed peasant women in fourteenth-century England flourished in running small businesses and managing their household affairs. Kathryn Reyerson has likewise examined the affairs of the fourteenth-century widow Martha de Cabanis to show how she was able to excel in the Mediterranean commercial sphere, accumulating significant financial wealth and property while operating as a cloth merchant in the city of Montpellier.[[31\]](#_ftn31) In contracts for the sale of enslaved persons, widows constituted the absolute majority of named sellers–well over sixty percent—and the largest proportion of named buyers where one or both transacting parties were women. In the subset of contracts enacted by Tommaso Duracino, there were seven women named as the sellers of enslaved persons, and in six of these seven contracts the women were denoted as widows.[[32\]](#_ftn32) It is difficult to gauge the degree of independence with which these widows acted in their commercial endeavours. Their participation in legal contracts generally required the expressed consent of their relatives, such as their parents or the direct relations of their deceased spouse. In the winter of 1457, for example, the widowed Clara Merello sold an enslaved Russian woman named Lucia to the wool worker Leonardo de Sanguineto. At the beginning of the contract the notary stated that the sale was done

> by the authority and volition and consent of... Egidio, her father...[[33\]](#_ftn33)

In this case, Egidio would have provided the dowry for the widowed Clara, and as such, he would have been integrally involved in the dispersion of her assets after the death of her spouse. The use of legal representatives by widowed women to act in their place was, however, a far more widespread practice. In the autumn of 1490, for example, the widowed Giacoba de Oliva sold an enslaved Bosnian woman named Melica to the merchant Galeazzo Pasqua. In this contract Melica appointed two men—Pellegro de Mandelo and the notary Niccolò Garbarino, who was the brother of her deceased spouse Girolamo—to represent her as procurators in the transaction.[[34\]](#_ftn34) In a similar sale enacted in the spring of 1484, the recently widowed Isolta de Marini purchased an enslaved Mingrelian woman named Margarita from Francesco Lomellini. In this case, Giovanni Danove, who was the notary who enacted the sale, also acted as the legal representative for Isolta. As such, the contract stated that Francesco

> has sold... and given and handed over to me, his notary, as it were, as a public official, stipulating and receiving in the name and place of Isolta... de Marini...[[35\]](#_ftn35)

Another frequent practice used by widowed women in the commercial sphere was the inclusion of a consent clause near the end of the *contract* which specified that the contract was enacted with the consent of two men who were relatives or close associates with both the widow and her deceased spouse. In the summer of 1457, for example, the noblewoman Caterina Pallavicini—the widow of Antonio Grillo—was named in two sales contracts for the enslaved. In the first contract, Caterina was named as the seller of an enslaved Russian woman named Lucia to the Venetian merchant Giovanni de Amatis.[[36\]](#_ftn36) In a second contract, enacted three weeks later, she was named as the buyer of an enslaved Albanian woman named Melica from the nobleman Benedetto Interiano.[[37\]](#_ftn37) Caterina was declared absent at the enacting of both contracts and was represented by the enacting notary in both situations. In the first contract, the sale of Lucia was conducted with the express consent of Cristoforo Grillo—the son of Caterina—and another slaveholder named Urbano Vivaldi, who was denoted as a close friend of Caterina. In the second contract, the purchase of Melica was conducted with complete independence by Caterina and as such there was no consent clause. The use of consent clause was common and customary for married women participating in commercial contracts although it was not a strict legal requirement. Widowed women were, however, generally excused from this customary requirement after the final disbursement of the assets of their deceased spouse. This allowed them to gain complete control over their property by law and the ability to invest or divest this property as participants in notarial contracts. In first contract, the consent clause was customary and probably served to protect Caterina from any claims that she might have been acting against the explicit or implicit desires expressed in the testament of her deceased spouse. For the subsequent purchase, as she was no longer under the patronage of the family of her deceased spouse, and furthermore, since the object of the contract was unrelated to her earlier marriage, she was able to act with greater independence without obtaining the consent of male guardians. But why would Caterina sell a young enslaved woman only to purchase another a few weeks later, and for a significantly greater amount of money?[[38\]](#_ftn38) The notarial contract was customarily silent about the motivation of the sales, but the ubiquity of men who sexually exploited the enslaved women that served in their households provides one possible answer.[[39\]](#_ftn39) If Antonio Grillo, the deceased spouse of Caterina, had been having sexual relations with Lucia, then Caterina might not have wanted to continue holding her after the death of her spouse, and the subsequent transport to Venice of Lucia would just about negate any future interaction between these two women. It might also be the case that Lucia had become pregnant, and that Caterina saw her condition as a hindrance to providing household service. All we know for certain is that Caterina seemed eager to replace Lucia. This desire was not only reflected in the quick subsequent purchase of another enslaved woman, but also in the rather low price of the sale, which was nearly forty lire less than the average amount obtained by exchanging an enslaved woman at this time.[[40\]](#_ftn40) And as an elite member of a *nobiles* albergo, she would have likely wished to retain the benefits of an enslaved household servant and as such simply replaced Lucia with Melica.

The ability of widows to act on their own accord in commercial contracts was reflected in cases where widowed women entered into sales contracts for enslaved persons independently, with neither paternal nor familial consent, nor the use of legal representatives, as shown above in the second transaction of Caterina Pallavicini. In another example from the autumn of 1478, the widowed Bertina Grimaldi sold an enslaved Circassian woman named Margarita without representation to the silk merchant Giovanni de Costa.[[41\]](#_ftn41) It must be noted that in every contract in which widowed women represented themselves, the women were from noble families. In contrast, for every contract in which widowed women from *mercantes* and *artefices* families were transactors—either as sellers or buyers—the women had obtained the consent or representation of men. The historian should thus be careful about assigning too much agency to women participating in the market economy of slavery, as only a small segment of the population—women from powerful noble families—were truly able to represent themselves.

### Women as procurators in the commerce of the enslaved

Another means by which women appeared as principals in sales contracts for the enslaved were as procurators for their spouses. The act of representation through procuration might suggest that this was a largely passive activity, but procurators were not simply subordinates to those they represented. In most cases, persons named as procurators were given powers to make important business decisions independently and on their own on behalf of those they represented.[[42\]](#_ftn42) In the summer of 1449, for example, the noblewoman Argenta Lomellini sold an enslaved Russian named Caterina on behalf of her spouse, the Genoese humanist Cipriano de Mari, to the nobleman Matteo Centurione. The contract stated that:

> Argentina... wife of Cipriano de Mari, citizen of Genoa, and as procurator of the sale by Cipriano, her husband, with full legal representation, etc., has sold... to Matteo Centurione...[[43\]](#_ftn43)

Cipriano was an active diplomat and humanist who had been an important figure in the Angevin court during the 1440s, first at Naples, then later at Provence.[[44\]](#_ftn44) The correspondence of Genoese chancellor Giacomo Bracelli shows that he also served on several diplomatic missions during this decade, representing the Republic of Genoa in embassies to Pietrasanta, Tunis, and Florence.[[45\]](#_ftn45) This political activity would have placed Cipriano out of the city for long stretches of time, and as such, he seems to have entrusted his spouse Argenta to act as his representative in commercial contracts back in Genoa. As a member of the Lomellini albergo Argenta would also have been familiar with the dynamics of the market economy of slavery and would have been capable of making crucial business decisions on behalf of her spouse. In another example from the spring of 1427, the slaveholder Violante de Calcine, the spouse of Giovanni de Michele of Valencia, represented her spouse in the sale of an enslaved Russian named Maddalena to the merchant Guillermo Piris, who was from Mallorca and passing through the port of Genoa. Giovanni was declared as “currently absent from the city of Genoa” in the contract. In this case, however, Violante also had obtained the services of another foreign merchant named Michele de Rosens to serve as her procurator with the “consent, authority, and volition” of her spouse. Her role in this transaction was thus to serve as a trusted broker between the absent Giovanni and the procurator Michele.[[46\]](#_ftn46) In a final example from the winter of 1392, the slaveholder Margarita, the spouse of an apothecary from the town of San Remo named Odone Galaffio, acted as the legal representative “in his name and place” of Odone for the purchase of an enslaved Tatar woman named Margarita from the notary Antonio de Castilione. The sale was transacted in the house of the metal worker Raffaele de Passano with all four witnesses also attested as metal workers. The notary did not record any explanation for the absence of Odone, but in this rare case of a woman from an *artefices* family purchasing an enslaved woman, it is not unreasonable to assume that her spouse had remained in San Remo to tend to his workshop while she was sent to Genoa to conduct the purchase.[[47\]](#_ftn47)

A transaction conducted by the widowed Maria Raibaldo is of particular interest. It represents an unusual situation: a rare instance where a woman was recorded as exchanging an enslaved man instead of an enslaved woman. In the winter of 1461, Maria sold an enslaved man from Oran named Ali to the Catalonian merchant Juan Focoberto.[[48\]](#_ftn48) Her deceased spouse, the merchant Giovanni Raibaldo, along with his brother Martino, had long-standing commercial contacts in Tunisia. In particular, Jacques Heers notes that Giovanni Raibaldo was active in the ransoming of north African captives whom he had often purchased from Iberian pirates. Heers describes a series of contracts enacted in the summer of 1454 in which Giovanni agreed to return two Muslim captives to Tunis for the sum of one hundred and sixty ducats and a measure of Tunisian cloth, which probably represented a significant profit over the cost of obtaining them.[[49\]](#_ftn49) Ali was therefore likely held captive in a similar situation with the plan on ransoming him back to the Hafsid Kingdom. It appears that Giovanni died before this plan was carried out and Ali subsequently became the captive of his widow Maria. Giovanna Petti Balbi notes that the *sindicatores* of Genoa had received a supplication in the autumn of 1460 from the widowed Maria, who confessed to having been reduced to poverty after the death of her spouse Giovanni. The *sindicatores* accepted her supplication and agreed to continue to pay to Maria the salary Giovanni had received as the former consul in Arles for the next fifteen years. They also gave her full legal authorization to manage his remaining business affairs.[[50\]](#_ftn50) This included the sale of Ali to the Catalonian merchant, which occurred about three weeks later.

There were also sales contracts where both principal transactors were women, although these were quite rare. In the winter of 1454, for example, the noblewoman Bianca Salvago, who was the spouse of Accelino Spinola, was named as his representative in the sale of an enslaved Circassian woman named Anna. Anna was sold to another married woman named Selvagia Grillo.[[51\]](#_ftn51) In this case, Bianca served as the legal representative—that is, she was named as procurator—for her absent spouse Accelino. He was a widely traveled Mediterranean merchant engaged with the burgeoning sugar industry in Iberia, the alum trade in Sicily, and he also owned tracts of agricultural land in Corsica.[[52\]](#_ftn52) These commercial activities would have kept him out of the city for long stretches of time, and the management of his local affairs would have fallen to his spouse Bianca.[[53\]](#_ftn53) Lluís Tudela Villalonga and other historians have argued that the relegation of business activity to women by itinerant merchants was a common practice in fifteenth century Genoa, as mentioned earlier. The contract also emphasized that the buyer Selvagia Grillo was acting on her own accord and not as a proxy for her spouse Francesco Frascaria. This suggests that she had assumed the role of the primary manager of the family household and its attendant business, which would have included the purchase of any enslaved women to exploit as domestic servants.

***

In this chapter, the social topography of slavery in late medieval Genoa was elucidated through a detailed examination of various contracts related to the exchange and exploitation of enslaved persons. These contracts allowed slaveholders to accumulate various forms of material and financial capital through the human capital of the enslaved. Historians have long recognized that one of the primary drivers for this economy was the strong demand for enslaved women from the Crimean Peninsula to exploit as servants in the homes of the elite merchant families. A detailed analysis of the social categories of the slaveholders named in these contracts, however, demonstrates the permeation of the institution of slavery across all socioeconomic categories and into all aspects of everyday life.

------

[[1\]](#_ftnref1) ASGe, San Giorgio 33740, Cabella sclavorum MCCCCXIII; ASGe, San Giorgio 33741, Cabella sclavorum MCCCCXXXXVII; ASGe, San Giorgio 33742, Cabella sclavorum MCCCCXXXXVIIII. Brief summaries are provided in the online inventory, see Enrica Ansaldi et al., “La Casa delle compere e dei banchi di San Giorgio 1407–1805,” Database, 2020, http://www.lacasadisangiorgio.eu/.

[[2\]](#_ftnref2) ASGe, San Giorgio 33744, Cabella sclavorum MCCCCLX. Sixteen soldi is 0.8 lire.

[[3\]](#_ftnref3) Domenico Gioffrè, *Il mercato degli schiavi a Genova nel secolo XV* (Genova: Fratelli Bozzi, 1971), pp. 67–73; Charles Verlinden, *L’esclavage dans l’Europe médiévale.* *Tome II: Italie, colonies Italiennes du Levant, Levant Latin* (Brügge: De Tempel, 1955), pp. 497–511.

[[4\]](#_ftnref4) This reflects the general ignorance of insurance contracts in academic studies of late medieval Mediterranean social and commercial worlds, which seem to take a back seat to sales contracts, family documents, and partnerships. For example, Domenico Gioffrè only considers insurance contracts to calculate the average monetary value of the enslaved; see *Il mercato degli schiavi a Genova nel secolo XV*, pp. 125–8.

[[5\]](#_ftnref5) In particular see the description beginning on page 54.

[[6\]](#_ftnref6) The recent studies of medieval Iberian slavery has also shown that enslaved persons in that region were also not just held by urban elites, but that lesser merchants, tradesmen, and artisans also exploited the enslaved for labour in their professional activities; see Roser Salicrú Lluch, “Slaves in the professional and family life of craftsmen in the Late Middle Ages,” in *La famiglia nell’economia Europea, secc. XIII–XVIII*, ed. Simonetta Cavaciocchi (Firenze University Press, 2009), pp. 325–6.

[[7\]](#_ftnref7) Quentin van Doosselaere, *Commercial Agreements and Social Dynamics in Medieval Genoa* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2009), pp. 183–207. See page 162 of this study for an overview of his argument.

[[8\]](#_ftnref8) See the section beginning on page 161 for an extended discussion of this underwriter.

[[9\]](#_ftnref9) Luigi Tria, *La schiavitù in Liguria: ricerche e documenti* (Genova: Società ligure di storia patria, 1947), pp. 33–40, focuses primarily on language and precedents in Roman law. Jacques Heers, *Esclaves et domestiques au Moyen Âge dans le monde méditerranéen* (Paris: Arthème Fayard, 1981)*, pp. 247–60* has a wider scope with a focus on socioeconomics and some examples from across the Mediterranean basin but is very general in nature.

[[10\]](#_ftnref10) ASGe, Notai antichi 889, Tommaso Duracino, filza 2, series II, nr. 234, dated 1456-09-24, where “Guliermus de Lancia barberius civis Ianue... propter multa grata et acepta servitia et benefitia per eum habita et recepta a Lucia eius serva et sclava de progenie Tartarorum ectatis annorum viginti trium in circa... Luciam eius servitiam et sclavam presentem instantem et humiliter requirentem manumisit franchivit quitavit liberavit et absolvit ab omnia potestate baylia et magistrato ac vinculo servitutis...”

[[11\]](#_ftnref11) Robin Blackburn, *The Making of New World Slavery: From the Baroque to the Modern, 1492–1800* (London: Verso, 1998), p. 55.

[[12\]](#_ftnref12) See Figure 5 and 6 on page 91 and page 92, respectively.

[[13\]](#_ftnref13) Loredana Garlati, “Women’s Succession from the Middle Ages to the Modern Era,” in *Succession Law, Practice and Society in Europe across the Centuries*, ed. Maria Gigliola di Renzo Villata (Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2018), pp. 208–9.

[[14\]](#_ftnref14) ASGe, Notai antichi 720, Bartolomeo Risso, filza 6, nr. 225, dated 1453-12-14, where “Octavianus Imperialis civis Ianue quondam Melchionis tanquam procurator et procuratorio nomine Limbanie uxor quondam Francesci Spinule quondam Iacobi... vendidit et titulo vendicionis dedit cessit tradidit et mandavit seu quasi Ambrogio Garreto civi Ianue quondam Bartholomei... quandam sclavam dicte Limbanie vocatam Madalenam ectatis annorum viginti quinque in circa de progenie Rubeorum...”

[[15\]](#_ftnref15) ASGe, Notai antichi 913, Tommaso Duracino, filza 26, series I, nr. 97, dated 1486-04-12, where “nobilis Baldasar de Nigrono civis Ianue domini Simonis... nobilis Perete filie quondam nobilis Philipi de Auria et uxor quondam nobilis Ane de Aura... vendidit et titulo et ex causa vendicionis dedit tradidit consignavit ut aserit quandam sclavam dicti Baldasaris nominatam Maria de progenie Bossinorum ectatis annorum decem septem vel circa...”

[[16\]](#_ftnref16) ASGe, Notai antichi 1033, Niccolò Raggi, filza 21, nr. 3, dated 1492-01-02 where the sale is made “pro tale qualis est”; see the description in Gioffrè, *Il mercato degli schiavi a Genova nel secolo XV*, p. 280.

[[17\]](#_ftnref17) See Chapter 12 for additional details on the use of enslaved persons in the workshops of the *artefices*.

[[18\]](#_ftnref18) Joan Kelly, “Did Women Have a Renaissance?” in *Becoming Visible: Women in European History*, ed. Renate Bridenthal and Claudia Koonz (Boston: Houghton Mifflin Co., 1977), pp. 145–6.

[[19\]](#_ftnref19) Lluís Tudela Villalonga, “Les dones dels mercaders genovesos i mallorquins a la primera meitat del segle XIV,” *Mayurqa* 28 (2002), pp. 223–40.

[[20\]](#_ftnref20) ASGe, Notai antichi 893, Tommaso Duracino, filza 6, series II, nr. 190, dated 1462-09-09, where “Antonius Carrega civis Ianue Raphaelis tamquam procurator et procuratorio nomine ut asservit Argentine sororis suo et uxor quondam Ieronomi Belogii... locavit et titulo locacionis concessit et concedit Nicolao de Varixio civi Ianue quondam Andalonis... quendam sclavum Argentine nominatum Georgius de progenie Iharchasiorum ectatis annorum viginti quinque vel circa...”

[[21\]](#_ftnref21) ASGe, Notai antichi 904, Tommaso Duracino, filza 17, nr. 936, dated 1474-12-15, where “Cristophorus Iudicus civis Ianue quondam Petri... vendidit et titulo vendicionis dedit et consignavit Bartholomee filie quondam Andree Marihione et uxori Quilici Imperialis... quandam sclavam dicti Christofori nominatam Caterina de progenie Zichorum ectatis annorum triginta quinque vel circa...”

[[22\]](#_ftnref22) ASGe, Notai antichi 1304, Antonio Pastorino, filza 15, nr. 355, dated 1499-03-14; see description in Gioffrè, *Il mercato degli schiavi a Genova nel secolo XV*, p. 268.

[[23\]](#_ftnref23) See the analysis beginning on page 305 for a detailed discussion of this phenomenon.

[[24\]](#_ftnref24) ASGe, Notai antichi 888, Tommaso Duracino, filza 1, series I, nr. 100, dated 1453-07-26, where “Cataneus de Grimaldis civis Ianue quondam Ianus... recognovit et recognoscit... Franchete filie Marchexii Lomelini et uxoris quondam domini Ricardini Spinule... habuisse et recepisse tantam quantitatem suarum rerum et mercium bonarum... cum effectu, hinc ad menses quinque proxime venturos libras centum quinquaginta Ianuinorum... si quedam sclava dicte Franchete vocata Margarita ectatis annorum viginti quinque in circa de progenie Iharchasiorum, nunc pregnans seu gravida mensium sex vel circa, de partu suo et de dicta eius pregnatione... salva et viva evaserit, tunc et eo causa presens instrumentum sit cassum irritum et nullum...”

[[25\]](#_ftnref25) ASGe, Notai antichi 1001, Lorenzo Costa, filza 15, nr. 309, dated 1492-12-05; see Gioffrè, *Il mercato degli schiavi a Genova nel secolo XV, p. 278,* for a brief description of the contract*.*

[[26\]](#_ftnref26) Women represented about 5% of transactors in sales contracts, 9.8% of transactors in leasing contracts, and 16.5% of purchasers in insurance contracts for the enslaved. See Figures 9 and 11, respectively.

[[27\]](#_ftnref27) See Chapter 13 for a discussion of women from religious houses purchasing the insurance of enslaved women.

[[28\]](#_ftnref28) See page 85 of this chapter the details on this phenomenon.

[[29\]](#_ftnref29) See the definition of the life-cycle of enslavement on page 12.

[[30\]](#_ftnref30) Twenty-five of twenty-nine elite women specified as owners in manumission contracts enacted between 1416 and 1497 were denoted as widows.

[[31\]](#_ftnref31) Barbara Hanawalt, *The Ties That Bound: Peasant Families in Medieval England* (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1986), pp. 223–5; Kathryn Reyerson, *Mother and Sons, Inc: Martha de Cabanis in Medieval Montpellier* (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2018), pp. 109–46.

[[32\]](#_ftnref32) ASGe, Notai antichi 890, Tommaso Duracino, filza 3, series I, nr. 24, dated 1457-01-24, sale by “Clara filia quondam Egidei Mereli et uxor quondam Nicolai de Monelia”. ASGe, Notai antichi 890, Tommaso Duracino, filza 3, series I, nr. 151, sale by “Caterineta filia quondam Benedectii Palavicini et uxor quondam Antonii Grili.” ASGe, Notai antichi 908, Tommaso Duracino, filza 21, nr. 498, dated 1478-09-28, sale by “Berthina filia quondam Oberti de Grimaldis et uxor quondam Philippi Ususmaris”, see note 70 on page 73 for details. ASGe, Notai antichi 915bis, Tommaso Duracino, filza 30, nr. 210, dated 1495-12-01, sale by “Pereta filia quondam nobilis Philipi de Auria et uxor quondam nobilis Ceva de Auria.” ASGe, Notai antichi 896, Tommaso Duracino, filza 9, nr. 249, dated 1466-05-19, sale by “Marietina... uxor quondam Elianus Spinula.”

[[33\]](#_ftnref33) ASGe, Notai antichi 890, Tommaso Duracino, filza 3, series I, nr. 24, dated 1457-01-24, where “Clara filia quondam Egidei Mereli et uxor quondam Nicolai de Monelia... tamen auctoritate et voluntate et consensii dicti Egidii, patris sui, presentis auctorantis et consentientis omnibus et singulis infrascriptis... vendidit dedit et tradidit et consegnavit Leonardo de Sanguineto civis Ianue lanerio filio Andrioli... quandam sclavam dicte Clare vocatam Lucia de progenie Rubeorum ectatis annorum quatuordecim vel circa...”

[[34\]](#_ftnref34) ASGe, Notai antichi 914bis, Tommaso Duracino, filza 28, series I, nr. 261, dated 1490-12-16, where “Nicolaus de Garbarino notaio quondam Iohannis et Pelegrus de Mandelo quondam Iohannis cives Ianue nomine et vice Iacobinote filie quondam Iacopo de Oliva et uxor quondam Ieronimi de Garbarino... vendiderunt … dederunt tradiderunt et consignaverunt Galeacio Pasque civi Ianue quondam Iulii... quandam sclavam dicte Iacobinete nominatam Melicha de progenie Bossinorum ectatis annorum decem et octo vel circa...”

[[35\]](#_ftnref35) ASGe, Notai antichi 918, Giovanni Danove, filza 3, series I, nr. 248, dated 1484-04-27, where “Franchiscus Lomellinus quondam Antonii... vendidit et titulo et ex causa vendicionis dedit tradidit et mandavit seu quasi michi notario infrascripto tamquam publice persone officio publico stipulanti et recipeinti nomine et vice Isoldie filie Baptiste de Marinis et uxoris quondam Thome de Marinis quondam Luchini...quandam sclavam ipsius Franchisci vocatam Margarite de progenie Mengrilorum etatis annorum viginti in circa...”; similarly, see ASGe, Notai antichi 897, Tommaso Duracino, filza 10, nr. 509, dated 1467-07-28, where the notary Tommaso acts as the legal representative for the widowed Bianca Usodimare, see note 7 on page 116 for further details.

[[36\]](#_ftnref36) ASGe, Notai antichi 890, Tommaso Duracino, filza 3, series I, nr. 151, dated 1457-05-30, where “Caterineta filia quondam Benedectii Palavicini et uxor quondam Antonii Grili... vendidit et titulo et ex causa vendicionis dedit tradidit et consignavit Iohanni de Amatis civi Venetiarum quondam Ieronimi... quandam sclavam ipsius Caterinete nominatam Lucia ectatis annorum viginti quinque vel circa de progenie Rubeorum... faciens predicta omnia et singula dicta Caterineta presentiaconsensu et de consilio Christofori Grili filii ipsius Caterinete et Urbani de Vivaldis quondam Cosme duorum ex melioribus et proximis...”

[[37\]](#_ftnref37) ASGe, Notai antichi 719, Bartolomeo Risso, filza 5, series I, nr. 181, dated 1457-06-22, where “Benedictus Italianus civis Ianue... vendidit et titulo vendicionis dedit cessit tradidit mandavit seu quasi Catarinete uxor quondam Antonii Grilli licet absenti ac michi notario etc... quandam sclavam ipsius Benedicti vocatam Melicha de progenie Alabanensium ectatis annorum XVIIII in circa...”

[[38\]](#_ftnref38) The enslaved Lucia, who was 25 years of age, was sold for 110 Genoese lire, while the enslaved Melica, who was 19 years of age, was purchased three weeks later for 185 Genoese lire. The average amount obtained by the exchange of an enslaved woman in 1457 was 146 lire (based on the sample of 23 contracts enacted that year in which the amount was indicated in Genoese lire).

[[39\]](#_ftnref39) On the sexual exploitation of enslaved women in the Mediterranean world, see Sally McKee, “The Implications of Slave Women’s Sexual Service in Late Medieval Italy,” in *Unfreie Arbeit: Ökonomische Und Kulturgeschichtliche Perspektiven*, ed. Mustafa Erdem Kabadayi and Tobias Reichardt (Hildesheim: Georg Olms, 2007), p. 103–4; Domenico Gioffrè, *Mostra storica del documento assicurativo del XIV–XVI secolo* (Genova: Centro di cultura e tecnica assicurativa, 1969), p. 31; Jacques Heers, *Esclaves et domestiques au Moyen Âge dans le monde méditerranéen* (Paris: Arthème Fayard, 1981), pp. 216–20.

[[40\]](#_ftnref40) The average price of an enslaved woman in the Genoese Mediterranean in 1457 was 145 Genoese lire.

[[41\]](#_ftnref41) ASGe, Notai antichi 908, Tommaso Duracino, filza 21, nr. 498, dated 1478-09-28, where “Berthina filia quondam Oberti de Grimaldis et uxor quondam Philippi Ususmaris... vendidit et titulo vendicionis dedit tradidit et consignavit Iohannis Antonio de Costa seaterio civis Ianue quondam Bartholomei...quandam sclavam dicte Berthine nominatam Margaritam de progenie Zichorum ectatis annorum viginti vel circa...”

[[42\]](#_ftnref42) See page 63 for a discussion of procuration in notarial contracts related to the enslaved.

[[43\]](#_ftnref43) ASGe, Notai antichi 587, Antonio Fazio, filza 13, series II, nr. 291, dated 1449-07-11, where “Argentina filia quondam Nicole Lomelini et uxor Ceprani de Mari civis Ianue et tanquam procuratore vendicione dicti Cepriani viri sui cum plena bailia, etc., vendidit... dedit cessit tradidit et mandavit seu quasi Mateo Centurione... quandam sclavam... vocata Caterina ectatis annorum XXX in circa de progenie Rubeorum...”

[[44\]](#_ftnref44) Oren Margolis, “Cipriano de’ Mari’s Lucianic Speech for René of Anjou (St-Dié, MS 37): Humanism and Diplomacy in Genoa and Beyond,” *Renaissance Studies* 27, no. 2 (2013), pp. 225–6. Margolis corrects the mistaken identification of Cipriano as a French jurist made by Gabriel Bianciotto, “A propos de Naples: sur un jeu et sur un hapax,” in *Et c’est la fin pour quoy sommes ensemble: hommage à Jean Dufournet: littérature, histoire et langue du Moyen Age*, ed. Jean-Claude Aubailly (Paris: Champion, 1993), p. 205.

[[45\]](#_ftnref45) Giacomo Bracelli, *L’Epistolario di Iacopo Bracelli*, ed. Giovanna Petti Balbi (Genova: Bozzi, 1969), docs. 24, 32, 34, 44, 46, 48, and 49; see also ASCGe, Manoscritti 26, Origine e fasti delle nobili famiglie di Genova, fol. 700v; ASCGe, Manoscritti 56, Delle nobili famiglie genovesi libro secondo, fol. 32v.

[[46\]](#_ftnref46) ASGe, Notai antichi 508, Branca Bagnara, register 3, 1426–1428, fols. 105v–106r, entry dated 1427-05-12, where “Violante filia quondam Bernardi Calcine et uxor Iohannis Micaelis de Valentia nunc absentis a civitate Ianue ut asserit, in presentia consensu auctoritate et voluntate Micaelis de Rosens procuratis ut asserit Iohannis Micaelis de Valentia cum ampla baylia ad hec vigore publice presenti infrascripti… vendidit et titulo dicto et ex causa vendicionis dedit et tradidit Guilliermo Piris de Maioricis... quandam sclavam ipsius Violantis vocatam Madalenam de progenie Rubeorum etatis annorum triginta trium vel circa...”

[[47\]](#_ftnref47) ASGe, Notai antichi 418, Cristoforo de Revellino, register 6, 1392, fol. 1r–v, entry dated 1392-01-02, where “Antonius de Casteliono notarius omni iure via modo et forma quibus melius potuit vendidit et titulo venditionis dedit et traddidit Margarite uxori Oddoni Galaffii de Sancto Romulbo speciarii presenti et recipienti suo proprio nomine et nomine et vice heredum et successorum suorum quamdam ipsius sclavam de progenie Tartarorum vocatum Margaritam etatis annorum decem et octo vel circha...”

[[48\]](#_ftnref48) ASGe, Notai antichi 893, Tommaso Duracino, filza 6, series I, nr. 27, dated 1461-01-15, where “Mariola Raybaldus civis Ianue... vendidit et titutlo vendicionis dedit et consignavit Iohanni Focoberte civi et mercatori maioricaris Ianue comoranti... quendam sclavum ipsius Mariole nominatum Ali... de progenie Maurorum... videlicet de Onerio nundinatum baptistatum.” The Raibaldi were a *poplares* family who were designated as mercantes; see ASCGe, Manoscritti 52, Famiglie popolari genovesi, fols. 553r–554v.

[[49\]](#_ftnref49) ASGe, Notai antichi 717, Bartolomeo Risso, filza 3, series II, nrs. 138, 139 and 140, dated 1454-07-26. See Jacques Heers, “Gênes et l’Afrique du Nord vers 1450: les voyages *per costeriam*,” *Anuario de estudios medievales*, no. 21 (1991), p. 240; Rossana Urbani, “Genova e il Maghrib tra il ‘400 e ‘500 (nuovi documenti archivistici),” in *Genova, la Liguria e l’oltremare tra Medioevo ed età moderna: studi e ricerche d’archivio*, ed. Raffaele Belvederi (Genova: Fratelli Bozzi, 1974), pp. 198–9. Also see ASGe, San Giorgio 116, fol. 118r, entry dated 1460-04-07 for records of the commercial activity of Giovanni in the Mediterranean.

[[50\]](#_ftnref50) ASGe, Archivio segreto 1792, Litterarum regestri 1447–1461, fol. 87r–v, entry dated 1460-12-19. See Giovanna Petti Balbi, “Le rappresentanze genovesi in Provenza in età bassomedievale,” in *Comunità forestiere e “*nationes*” nell’Europa dei secoli XIII–XVI*, ed. Giovanna Petti Balbi (Napoli: Liguori, 2001), p. 278.

[[51\]](#_ftnref51) ASGe, Notai antichi 894, Tommaso Duracino, filza 7, series II, nr. 17, dated 1464-01-13, where “Acelinus Spinula de Luculo civis Ianue Ieronimi sciens et congnoscens Blanchinam filiam quondam Ludovici Salvagi et uxorem ipsius Acelini vendidisse et consignassi Salvagine filie quondam Gregorii Grilli et uxori Francisci Frascharii quandam sclavam ipsius Acelini nominatum Anna de progenie Zichorum sive Rubeorum ectatis annorum viginti octo vel circa...”

[[52\]](#_ftnref52) ASGe, Notai antichi 718, Bartolomeo Risso, filza 4, series II, nr. 238, dated 1456-10-07, where “...capsiis ducentis quadraginta zucarorum et pulverum que carrigate fuerunt in navem quondam Leonini Italiani in Mulecha per gubernatores fructe Muleche vel alium seu alios pro eis, causa consignandi in Ianua Iohani Iudici et Acelino Spinule.” Edition in Mohamed Ouerfelli, *Le sucre: production, commercialisation et usages dans la Méditerranée médiévale* (Leiden: Brill Academic Publishers, 2008), pp. 716–7.

[[53\]](#_ftnref53) Tudela Villalonga, “Les dones dels mercaders genovesos i mallorquins a la primera meitat del segle XIV,” p. 230.