# Chapter 5 The demography of slavery: economic trends of slaveholding in the Genoese Mediterranean

This chapter will continue the analysis of slaveholding and slaveholders in the late medieval Genoese Mediterranean by analyzing the economic and geospatial trends in contracts related to the exchange of enslaved persons. The narrative will shift from the qualitative analysis of social structure of slaveholding to the quantitative analysis of various economic and quantitative indicators. The economic portion of this analysis will consider contract distribution across our period of study—the long fifteenth century from 1348 to 1528—as well as pricing trends and conditions of exchange. The evolution of the market economy of slavery during our period of study will elucidate the shifts in the social dynamics and geospatial patterns of enslavement in the Genoese Mediterranean.

The first detailed economic analysis on the exchange of enslaved persons in the Genoese market of slavery was provided by Domenico Gioffrè and recapitulated a few years later by Charles Verlinden.[[1\]](#_ftn1) Hannah Barker has recently returned to these figures, consolidating the analyses of Verlinden and expanding upon the analysis of Gioffrè through a comparison of economic data from Genoa with economic data from Venice and the Mamluk Empire.[[2\]](#_ftn2) The analysis in this chapter is an extension of these works and takes into account additional forms of sales contracts, as well as leasing and insurance contracts, and considers a considerably larger sample of contracts within a more compact temporal range. This chapter is therefore based upon a close and painstaking analysis of over one thousand and eight hundred contacts in order to identify and isolate the socioeconomic and kinship data related to the market economy of slavery, as well as correcting numerous errors made by earlier studies that used these contracts. It will demonstrate that the tumultuous political world of the fifteenth-century Mediterranean did not significantly affect the capitalization of the market economy of slavery in Genoa and that this economy that continued to grow after the collapse of the Black Sea colonies. This chapter also demonstrates how the development and proliferation of new financial instruments—particularly insurance and leasing contracts related to slavery—provided additional means for Genoese merchants to accumulate financial capital from the exchange of enslaved men and women.

## 5.1 Money and financial capital

The central section of the corpus in sales, leasing, and insurance contracts related to enslaved persons was the agreement “for the price and final price” that placed a monetary value on the object of the transaction. In the language of the contract, the slaveholder or underwriter confessed to the receipt of the price from the buyer or receiver, or some other third party in money or other forms of capital. This payment of the “price” generally occurred at or just before the time of enactment, but it could also occur at an earlier or later specified date. This section will examine the forms of payment used in contracts relating to enslavement. These forms of payment not only offer insights into the market economy of slavery, but also provide supplementary insights into the social topography of slaveholding described in Chapter 4.

### Monetary payment

The topic of money in the late medieval Mediterranean is a vast and complex subject that is beyond the scope of this study.[[3\]](#_ftn3) But since most notarial contracts relating to enslaved persons concerned the exchange of capital in the form of money, it is thus necessary to understand how money was used in Genoese commerce for a proper understanding of the market economies of slavery. The most usual form of money was the Genoese lire. There was no corresponding physical coin for the lire: it was strictly a money of account, what Carlo Cipolla has famously referred to as “ghost money”[[4\]](#_ftn4) The physical monies that circulated in Genoa were the *soldus* and the *denarus*, both made from a mixture of silver and copper. These were the currencies of everyday life in Genoa, and they had the following relationships with each other and the money of account:

1 lira = 20 *soldi* = 240 *denari*
1 *soldus* = 12 *denari*

Since Genoa was a nexus for trans-Mediterranean trade, some contracts also specified money paid in foreign currencies, which were almost always gold ducats minted by various nations. Itinerant merchants valued these coins because they had a strictly regulated weight and gold content and were accepted as currency in a variety of Mediterranean nations. The ducats minted by Venice, the kingdom of Aragon, and Florence all contained the same measure of three-and-a-half grams of gold, and these were seen in many contracts enacted with merchants from these locales.[[5\]](#_ftn5)

The determination of an exact, or even moderately accurate, exchange rate between these gold coins and the Genoese lire for a specific time and place is a nearly impossible task, fraught with mistaken assumptions and lack of proper datasets. The *Officium monete* began to issue occasional declarations translating the value the lire to that of the gold ducat in the later fifteenth century, with valuations ranging between two and three lire per ducat between 1450 and 1516.[[6\]](#_ftn6) This is the range which will be assumed for the purposes of this study when analyzing various contracts on an individual basis—but if and only if the contract was enacted contemporaneously with the proclamation of the *Officium monete*. Any comparative price analysis of contracts specified in lire and contracts specified in ducats, or any conversion of ducats to lire or *vice versa*, across considerable time spans will therefore be strictly avoided. This is a fundamental methodological error that the late medieval historian must avoid, as there were far too many contingent spatiotemporal and economic variables to allow for the proper comparison of values.

The payment in most contracts related to the exchange of enslaved men and women was made in Genoese lire, that is, paid in money of account in the form of a transfer from the account of the buyer to the account of the seller. In these cases, there was no physical coinage involved in the exchange and the contracts sometimes specified an account from which the payment was transferred. This specification was often used when the payment was coming from a third-party account, that is, an account not registered in the name of the buyer. In the summer of 1467, for example, the merchant Andrea de Spigno sold an enslaved Russian woman named Maria to the recently widowed Bianca Usodimare. Bianca was absent at the enactment of the sale and was represented by Tommaso Duracino, who was also the enacting notary. Tommaso confessed to having received the payment of 200 Genoese lire on behalf of Maria in funds transferred from the account of Raffaele de Marini, a relative of her deceased spouse Domenico de Marini.[[7\]](#_ftn7) In this case, as in most cases, there was no physical coinage involved in the exchange. The naming of an account is also used in cases where the payment came from more than one account or when the buyer needed to specify the bank or banker holding the account. The following example illustrates both these situations. In the summer of 1415, the merchant Cattaneo de Dernixio sold an enslaved Bulgarian child named Lanzarotto to the nobleman Baldassare Spinola. In this case Cattaneo confessed to having received the complete payment of 99 Genoese lire in a transfer from two accounts: a transfer of 24 lire held by the bank of Niccolò Lomellini and a transfer of 75 lire held by the bank of Gaspare Vivaldi.[[8\]](#_ftn8)

In certain cases, especially those involving foreign merchants, the price was sometimes specified as having been paid in real currency, often in gold ducats or Florins, which were described as “large ducats of good gold” or some similar phrase. In the winter of 1483, for example, the merchant from Naples named Antonio Cepula sold an enslaved Turkish man named Elia to the merchant Antonio de Sale. Antonio Cepula was represented in this contract by Bernardo de Gaudeno, a citizen of Novara who was serving as a scribe on a ship passing through the port of Genoa that was patronized by Ferdinand II of Aragon.[[9\]](#_ftn9) In this case, Antonio de Sale paid Bernardo 30 gold ducats in physical coinage, a form of payment that was preferred by many itinerant merchants over money of account. The real money received in these transactions would have been immediately reusable in any subsequent transactions, which was useful on mercantile voyages with multiple stops at numerous Mediterranean ports. Although payment in money of account offered additional security, it also required itinerant merchants to open separate accounts in multiple cities. This might not have been the preference for small and independent operators, that is, merchants with their own ships who were not working for large family firms.

This payment in real money (physical coinage) as opposed to the account money of Genoese lire was far more common in sales contracts than in leasing contracts. This was certainly due to the stronger participation of foreign merchants in the former activity.[[10\]](#_ftn10) There were nevertheless some cases where the lease of an enslaved man or woman involved the exchange of real money. In the winter of 1481, for example, the wood worker Martino de Coronato leased out an enslaved Albanian child named Pietro to the merchant Bartolomeo Palmario for twelve large ducats of good gold.[[11\]](#_ftn11) In this case Martino was from an *artefices* family from the commune of Voltri, located just west of the city of Genoa. The combination of his social status and his habitation outside the urban fabric circumscribed by the city walls might have led to his desire to receive payment in real money rather than lire.

### Alternative forms of payment

The economy of the premodern Mediterranean was not yet a fully realized monetary economy. The existence of barter and payment ‘in-kind’ persisted well into the early modern era. Fernand Braudel argued that barter and other forms of non-monetary exchange, which he termed ‘imperfect currencies,’ constituted an alternative economy that “survived in the heart of Europe, encircled by monetary life which did not destroy them” well into the eighteenth century.[[12\]](#_ftn12) This persistence of non-monetary forms of exchange can also be seen in the economies of slavery of the late medieval Genoese Mediterranean world.

#### Shares and income of the Casa di San Giorgio

The Casa di San Giorgio began operations in 1408, appointing a group of eight individuals charged with consolidating the public debt and eliminating the questionable practices that created an irrational and unusual money market.[[13\]](#_ftn13) By 1413 the Casa was a largely autonomous financial institution divided into two parts: a deposit bank backed by state revenues and a bond fund that sold and purchased shares of the consolidated national debt (the *comperarum Sancti Georgii*).[[14\]](#_ftn14) The shares of the consolidated debt were termed *loca* (*locum* in the singular) and the income received from these shares was termed *paghe* (*paga* in the singular). 

The organization of the Casa was overseen by an extended bureaucracy headed by the *Officium protectorum Sancti Georgii*, a council of eight executive officers (called *protectores*) selected by the major shareholders of the bank. The *protectores* had to be citizens of Genoa and had to hold at least one thousand Genoese lire of the communal debt to be eligible to serve the Casa, a requirement that ensured that the positions were largely restricted to wealthy citizens. The *protectores* in turn selected a council of four governors to manage the deposit side of the bank (called *gubernatores*) and a council of fifty-two advisors or consuls (called *consiliares*).[[15\]](#_ftn15) The eight *protectores* also served as the procuratores of the *Comperarum Sancti Georgii*; that is, they were also charged with managing the debt side of the bank.[[16\]](#_ftn16) Figure 15 provides additional clarification on these divisions.

[ image 100012A1.svg ]

Figure 15: The organizational structure of the Casa di San Giorgio during the fifteenth century

The Casa was not an institution intended to compete with private bankers and it did not extend credit to individuals. It instead offered private bankers a secure place to consolidate their reserves in a single account instead of across several deposit accounts with other private bankers. These bankers welcomed the Casa and were quick to place their own reserves in account in order to mitigate the risk of dispersed uninsured deposits. The prominent Genoese banker Niccolò Lomellini, for example, used the Casa di San Giorgio for this very purpose from 1408 to 1419.[[17\]](#_ftn17) An analysis the deposits and credits by Niccolò show his extensive use of the new institution for deposits, transfers, and extending credit. His account at the Casa was the source for many payments in the market economy of slavery. In the summer of 1415, for example, the merchant Cattaneo de Dernixio sold an enslaved Bulgarian child named Lanzarotto to the nobleman Baldassare Spinola, with the payment partially made as a transfer from the account of Niccolò Lomellini.[[18\]](#_ftn18)

The emerging secondary market in *loca* allowed their use as an alternative to hard currency and bills of exchange. Genoese creditors would often extend credit by lending out multiples of *loca* and likewise accept payments in multiples of *loca*. The shares themselves thus became a form of currency among merchants in the Genoese Mediterranean. This made commercial transactions simpler by allowing debt reimbursement without worrying about currencies and conversion rates.[[19\]](#_ftn19) It also ensured that financial credit market would be limited to the elites who could afford to participate in the exchange of *loca*. The use of *loca* instead of cash or bills of exchange might have finally provided a convenient means to evade criticisms of usury, although late medieval Genoese merchants did not seem particularly worried about such accusations.[[20\]](#_ftn20)

There were many cases where the transactors agreed on the exchange of an enslaved man or woman for a quantity of *loca* (shares) or in *paghe* (future income on a specified quantity of shares) of the Casa di San Giorgio. In the winter of 1473, for example, the slaveholder Antonia Robello, a resident of the commune of Varazze, leased out an enslaved Circassian woman named Lucia to the merchant Girolamo Calvo for a term of thirteen years. In the contact Antonia was represented by the notary Egidio Sacherio, who was named as her procurator, and the payment was made in three *loca* of the Casa di San Giorgio, which according to the tabulation of Jacques Heers were each valued at approximately 48 Genoese lire at the time.[[21\]](#_ftn21) Girolamo was from a *nobiles* family with strong social ties to the Casa di San Giorgio and was a well-regarded figure in Genoese society. Antonio Gallo—the chronicler, humanist, and future chancellor of San Giorgio—had praised his valour as the captain of a vessel during the military actions against Catalonia in 1466.[[22\]](#_ftn22) Girolamo also served many important roles in financial governance, including on the *Officium mercantie* in 1477 and the *Officium camere de compere* in 1474, which were councils that made decisions, respectively, on public spending and the management of the public debt.[[23\]](#_ftn23) Antonia Robello and her spouse Luca Bertorino, in contrast, were both members of middling *artefices* families who lived in the commune of Varazze, a coastal community located about 40 km west of Genoa. The Robello family were largely scattered around the communes of Varazze and Arenzano and seemed to have no political or economic influence in Genoese society.[[24\]](#_ftn24) The Bertorino family into which she married was equally obscure and uninfluential.[[25\]](#_ftn25) The lease of Lucia to the nobleman Girolamo Calvo would have provided a means by which the artisans Luca and Antonietta could forge social ties with an influential figure in Genoese society. Their receipt of shares in the Casa di San Giorgio—a unique form of capital that provided a reliable source of government backed income—was a payment generally reserved for the elites of Genoese society and their receipt of these shares would furthermore signify their connection with these elites.

In another example from the spring of 1494, the merchant Girolamo de Fornari sold an enslaved Bosnian woman named Margarita to the notary Stefano de Frevante for 335 Genoese lire. The contract indicated that the payment was made with the income of shares of the Casa di San Giorgio issued for the year 1491.[[26\]](#_ftn26) This sale was also enacted in the portico of the Palazzo di San Giorgio and the thematic convergence of place of enactment and means of payment suggests that one or both transactors had close connections to the bank. Indeed, the buyer Stefano was the son of the deceased Pietro de Frevante , who was also a notary and who had served as the chancellor of San Giorgio in the 1470s.[[27\]](#_ftn27) In this case the shares themselves were not payment, but rather their annual premium was used to pay for Margarita.

The increased use of *loca* and *paghe* of the Casa di San Giorgio in sales contracts for enslaved persons also illustrates the increasing entanglement of slavery and the bank during the fifteenth century. It also suggests that slaveholding was becoming more of an elite activity but, at the same time, a means by which slaveholders from *artefices* families might access these new financial instruments while simultaneously establishing important connections within the social networks of elite merchant families. This topic will be considered in greater detail in Chapter 8.

#### Payment in goods and services

Payment ‘in-kind,’ that is, in exchange for goods or services, was also seen in contracts for enslaved persons, particularly in sales contracts. In the winter of 1500, for example, an enslaved baptized Muslim named Bianca was sold by the nobleman Baldassare Negrone to the silk merchant Giovanni Battista de Facio.[[28\]](#_ftn28) The payment for this transaction was made in 160 *palmi* of black velvet, which was approximately 40 meters of black velvet of the standard width, that is, the width of a workshop loom.[[29\]](#_ftn29) In another contract from the autumn of 1465, an enslaved Circassian woman named Elena was purchased by the barber Giovanni de Merello from Juan Focoberto, who was a merchant from Mallorca. The payment for this transaction was a measure of Mallorcan wool valued at 127 Genoese lire.[[30\]](#_ftn30) In this case the measure of wool was not a physical amount, as was the velvet described in the previous transaction, but a value specified in the currency of account. In both cases the individuals named as buyers of the enslaved would have had easy access to these commodities. The Genoese silk merchant Battista probably had some black velvet laying around his workshop and the Mallorcan merchant Juan Focoberto was probably transporting wool in his vessel. There are also some contracts where payment was accepted by a mixture of money and commodities. In the summer of 1459, for example, an enslaved Circassian woman named Caterina was sold by the merchant Giovanni de Abbatibus to Francisco de Ibiza, a merchant and citizen of Valencia who was stationed in the port of Genoa, for 120 Genoese lire. The payment was specified as a quantity of wool of assorted colours, valued at 80 lire, with the remaining 40 lire paid in money of account.[[31\]](#_ftn31) Francisco was also likely transporting this wool in his vessel and both parties found it amenable to use it as a partial means of payment instead of account currency.

The exchange of enslaved persons for physical commodities was mostly used in the sales of the enslaved. This mode of payment was sometimes used in the leasing of the enslaved, although it was less common in this activity. In the summer of 1446, for example, an enslaved Russian woman named Maria held by the merchant Barnaba Tagliavacca, from the commune of Busalla, was leased out the to the merchant Niccolò Musso from Savona.[[32\]](#_ftn32) Busalla was a commune located in the mountains north of Genoa and was a feudal domain of the Spinola family while Savona was a Ligurian port city allied with the republic of Genoa. The payment was received as a mixture of money of account and “other things” that are not specifically named. In another example from the summer of 1487, an enslaved woman named Maddalena held by the silk weaver Guglielmo Maida was leased to serve the merchant Benedetto de Franchi for a term of nine years. The payment was made with an unspecified quantity of pine wood.[[33\]](#_ftn33) Guglielmo was an inhabitant of the commune of Isolabona, a commune located in the mountains of Imperia which was a feudal domain of the Doria family.[[34\]](#_ftn34) In both contracts the persons receiving the payment were from communes outside the city of Genoa. The distance of the locales from the city centre might have been a factor in these slaveholders accepting physical goods instead of money of account for these leases. Both communes were still feudal domains where the exchange of physical goods for physical goods was still a commonplace practice and preferred over the use of financial instruments used in the port cities. Figure 16 illustrates the geographical locales of the persons involved in these leasing contracts.

[ image 703011.A1.svg ] 

Figure 16: Location of the communes of Isolabona and Busalla relative to the cities of Genoa and Savona 

## 5.2 Temporal trends in the exchange of enslaved persons

The market economy of slavery in the Genoese Mediterranean was based upon a variety of legal and financial instruments. The most important of these were those notarial contracts specifically developed for the exchange and exploitation of enslaved persons: namely sales, leasing, insurance, and manumission contracts. A time series analysis of enactment dates for these four types of contracts enacted in the city of Genoa illustrates several aspects of the economic rhythms of the market economy of slavery across our ‘long fifteenth century.’

The distribution illustrates that sales of enslaved persons remained relatively constant throughout the entire period, although there were moderate ebbs and flows from decade to decade. The decades 1411–20 and 1451–60 appear as peak periods for the sales of enslaved persons in the market economy of slavery. These peaks might reflect the incompleteness of the documentary record, but they might also reflect actual periods of concentrated activity in the exchange of enslaved persons. The peak in the decade of the 1410s correlates with the strongest period of the Genoese colonial enterprise in the eastern Mediterranean, before the increasing incursion of the Ottoman Empire into this region weakened its structural foundations. The second peak in the 1450s might similarly indicate an increased frenzy of activity resulting from the Ottoman conquest of Constantinople in 1453, a pivotal event that led to the collapse of the commercial networks underpinning the Balkan and Crimean slaving zones.

[ image 701014A1.svg ]

Figure 17: Sales contracts enacted by decade 1380–1500 as a proportion of total sales contracts. From the dataset of 632 sales contracts recorded by Genoese notaries.

The vigorous and constant exchange of enslaved persons in sales contracts across the entire fifteenth century demonstrates that the Genoese were able to maintain a constant source of enslaved persons. The compression of eastern Mediterranean slaving zones in the middle of the century was concurrent with the expansion of Genoese social and commercial networks in the western Mediterranean. The distribution of these contracts illustrates that the supply of enslaved persons remained relatively constant as slaving zones shifted westwards during the latter half of the fifteenth century.

Figure 18 illustrates the distribution by decade of leasing contracts on enslaved persons enacted in Genoa between the years 1370 to 1500. This histogram indicates that the leasing of enslaved persons was a marginal activity within in market economy of slavery during the fourteenth century and became increasingly prevalent by the second half of the fifteenth century. This stands in contrast to the distribution of sales contracts shown in Figure 17, which were relatively flat throughout the same time period.

[ image 702000A1.svg ]

Figure 18: Leasing contracts enacted by decade 1370–1500 as a proportion of total leasing contracts. From the dataset of 257 lease contracts recorded by Genoese notaries.

The city of Genoa often served as a terminal node for many enslaved persons, but the exchange of these captives among various merchant families was not necessarily complete. They could be permanently transferred from one household to another by means of additional sales contracts and they could also be temporarily transferred from one household to another by means of leasing contracts. The increased popularity of exploiting enslaved women as wet nurses in elite families in the middle fifteenth century might account for this rise in leasing contracts over time.[[35\]](#_ftn35) It also allowed a secondary means by which Genoese slaveholders could accumulate financial and social capital through the temporary exchange of enslaved bodies.

Figure 19 illustrates the distribution by decade of life insurance contracts on enslaved women enacted in Genoa between the years 1400 and 1510.

[ image 704002A1.svg ]

Figure 19: Insurance contracts enacted by decade 1400–1510 as a proportion of total insurance contracts. From the dataset of 222 insurance contracts recorded by Genoese notaries.

This histogram illustrates that insurance on the lives of enslaved pregnant women was a minor phenomenon in the market economy of slavery until the middle of the fifteenth century, after which it became increasingly popular. The span from 1440 to 1480 was the peak period for the insurance of enslaved women by means of notarial contracts. The sharp decline in the number of these contracts after 1480 does not represent a corresponding decline in the insurance of enslaved women, but rather reflects the switch from using notaries to using private account books to record the purchase of life insurance.[[36\]](#_ftn36)

Figure 20 illustrates the distribution by decade of manumission contracts on enslaved persons enacted in Genoa between the years 1400 to 1500.

[ image 705001A1.svg ]

Figure 20: Histogram of manumission contracts enacted by decade, 1400–1500. From the dataset of 308 manumission contracts recorded by Genoese notaries.

There are two distinct trends in the distribution of manumission contracts. The first was the spike in manumissions during the decade 1450 to 1460. This decade was a time of considerable turmoil in the eastern Mediterranean, particularly with the conquest of Constantinople by Mehmet II and the subsequent constriction of Genoese trade routes to the Black Sea. It might have been the case that some pious Genoese slaveholders interpreted these events as divine punishment for their sins and were thus motivated to liberate their enslaved persons as a form of repentance. The language of manumission contracts, however, does not explicitly nor implicitly suggest any such motivation. The lack of Latin terminology on repentance and penance relating to slaveholding has led Steven Epstein to observe “the complete absence of any sign of regret about slavery” at the time of manumission. This conspicuous absence emphasized that slavery was a socially and culturally sanctioned economic activity.[[37\]](#_ftn37) This sanction is reflected in the language of contracts in the market economy of slavery which often refer to the “customs of the slaves” or some such similar terms.[[38\]](#_ftn38) The suggestion that the spiritual turmoil engendered by the conquest of Constantinople led to an increase in manumissions must therefore be approached with trepidation. The second trend was an increase in the number of manumissions from the second half of the fifteenth century. This seems to suggest that manumission was becoming more common, especially since the number of sales remained constant for this period. It is again difficult to determine why this might be the case and it is tempting to suggest that there may have been a growing cultural unease with slaveholding as the century progressed. It might also indicate an increasing unwillingness to bear the cost of holding enslaved men and women into old age. The manumission of the enslaved was, furthermore, increasingly interpreted as a ‘good work’ and thus an important contribution to the salvation of the slaveholder. It could be seen as the creation of a free person and, perhaps more importantly, a free Christian through an act of charity on behalf of the slaveholder. The act of manumission, through the triangulation of these possible motivations, allowed Genoese slaveholders to accumulate spiritual capital—using our model of the economy of slavery—while simultaneously divesting themselves of an increasingly less valuable financial asset. This trend might finally be reflective of the shifting demographics of enslavement. The constriction of supply resulting from the loss of many eastern Mediterranean and Black Sea trading colonies in the second half of the fifteenth century might have resulted in a greater proportion of older men and women in the enslaved population and this demographic shift would have been reflected in a greater proportion of manumissions.

It is nearly impossible to determine what proportion of enslaved persons were emancipated by Genoese slaveholders. The small number of manumission contracts compared to sales, leasing, and insurance contracts suggests that freedom through manumission was not in the cards for most of the enslaved. An optimistic estimate would be around twenty percent; but again, the paucity of the sources makes any form of reasonably accurate determination nearly impossible. The experience of manumission was therefore the experience of a small minority of enslaved persons: the majority would have remained enslaved until death.

**

The histograms related to the sales, leasing, insurance, and manumission of enslaved persons are indicative of the robust character of the late medieval economies of slavery in the Genoese Mediterranean. They also implicitly reveal long-term trends in the structure of this economy. The constricting of the Black Sea region as a source for enslaved persons in the second half of the fifteenth century led to a westward shift in Genoese slaving zones and the development of new instruments to extract capital from the exchange of enslaved persons.

### 5.3 Nominal price trends in sales and leasing contracts

The price trends for enslaved persons will be considered separately, since there was a marked difference in the prices obtained through their exchange. The analysis will furthermore be restricted to contracts in which prices were denoted in Genoese lire—a subset which represented almost ninety percent of total contracts—since it is difficult to determine the proper exchange rates with sufficient accuracy for all points of the entire time period.[[39\]](#_ftn39)

Figure 21 below illustrates the nominal average annual price for enslaved women in sales contracts enacted in Genoa from 1348 to 1528.

[ image 701012A1.svg ] 

Figure 21: Nominal price trend for enslaved women in the Genoese Mediterranean, 1348–1528. From the dataset of 552 sales contracts.

The graph reveals a steady and moderately exponential upward trend in the nominal price for enslaved women during the period of this study. The loss of the Black Sea colonies of Pera in the year 1453 and Caffa in the year 1475—events seen as catastrophic to the Genoese Mediterranean slave trade—did not seem to have a pronounced effect on the direction or magnitude of this trend. An abrupt upward spike in prices in the second half of the fifteenth century might be expected with the precipitous drop in supply of enslaved persons from the Black Sea. But the replacement of these enslaved women by the enslaved Muslim women of Iberia and north Africa, the Guanches of the Canary Islands, and enslaved west Africans served to maintain the existing steady and upward trend in prices. Sally McKee argues that this continuous upward trend in prices made slaveholding increasingly inefficient economically and suggests the increased use of enslaved women as sexual servants as a plausible explanation for this upward trend.[[40\]](#_ftn40) This may be part of the reason for the upward trend but one should also consider the increased value placed on enslaved persons as objects of conspicuous consumption.[[41\]](#_ftn41) The historian should also be wary of any assumptions that late medieval slaveholders—especially persons from the *nobiles* social category—had sufficient knowledge of an accurate measure of economic efficiency of the women that they held in captive slavery versus their perceived economic efficiency. This application of rational choice theory to medieval historical situations has been increasingly criticized as ignoring historical and geographical context.[[42\]](#_ftn42) If the proclamations of the *Officium monete* during the fifteenth century—which fixed the value of the Genoese lire to the measure of gold in the ducat (that is, at 3½ grams of gold)—are taken as time-series data for an approximate price index, then it might be said that the real price for enslaved women increased less sharply during this period.[[43\]](#_ftn43) The situation for enslaved men, however, is much less clear

The average prices after the year 1453 also exhibit an increasing deviation from the norm compared with average prices before that historically pivotal date. This can be explained by the greater diversity in the regional provenance of the enslaved after 1453, with increasing numbers of enslaved African and Iberian women sold at lower costs by the Genoese and not by the decreasing numbers of enslaved women from the Black Sea region. The arrival of Jewish exiles recently expelled from the Iberian Peninsula after the year 1492 also allowed several Genoese merchants to take advantage of their desperate situation and their presence contributed to this greater deviation. In the years after their expulsion from Spanish Kingdoms, some Iberian Jews passing through the port of Genoa sold their young children into temporary slavery to work in elite households for a fixed time, generally five to ten years, after which they would be freed from future obligation. Rossana Urbani and Guido Zazzu attribute this phenomenon to the extreme poverty of the Sephardic Jews forced out of Iberia.[[44\]](#_ftn44) These ‘sales’ were essentially short-term leasing contracts that might also have been attempts by their parents to save their children from the dangerous and uncertain life of exile at sea until they were able to resettle in a new locale, after which they would be able to return for them. The prices paid for these enslaved Jewish children were generally much lower than the prices normally paid for other enslaved Mediterranean peoples, primarily due to the temporary nature of the contracts.[[45\]](#_ftn45) In the summer of 1494, for example, the *nobilis* merchant Raffaele Lomellini sold an enslaved woman named Caterina, described as formerly Jewish, to the merchant Giovanni Marzoco for a price of 10 gold ducats. This was approximately one-quarter of the average price paid for an enslaved woman of her age at this time.

Figure 22 illustrates the nominal average annual price for enslaved men in sales contracts enacted in Genoa from 1348 to 1528. The scale is identical to that indicated earlier in Figure 21 on page 131.

[ image 701013A1.svg ]

Figure 22: Nominal price trend for enslaved men in sales contracts enacted in Genoa, 1348–1528. From the dataset of 632 sales contracts.

The graph reveals a very slight upward trend in the nominal price for enslaved men with a near negligible flattening in the later decades. As with the nominal prices for women, the loss of dominion over Pera in the year 1453 and Caffa in the year 1475 did not seem to have a pronounced effect on the direction or magnitude of this trend. The average prices after 1453 do exhibit a growing divergence from the norm compared with those before this historically pivotal date. This divergence was analogous to the case for enslaved women but much more pronounced, to the point where it might be difficult to suggest a definite trend after 1460. This might be the result of the lack of sufficient data on enslaved men for the decades following the conquest of Constantinople, but it might also be reflective of a stronger relationship between price and some other variable, such as age or regional provenance, for men as compared to women. This flatness of the trend-line also indicates that the real price for enslaved men decreased slightly during this period. This decline in the value attached to enslaved men might also be an indication that artisans were slowly moving away from holding enslaved men as workshop labourers in favor of hiring poor men from the city and countryside for the same purpose. This assumption, however, requires further research on the patterns of slaveholding by workshop artisans after 1460 that I hope to undertake in the future.

Figure 23 illustrates the nominal average annual price for enslaved women in leasing contracts enacted in Genoa from 1385 to 1500. [[46\]](#_ftn46)

[ image 702001A1.svg ]

Figure 23: Nominal price trend for enslaved women in leasing contracts enacted in Genoa, 1370–1500. From the dataset of 257 leasing contracts recorded by Genoese notaries.

There are two trend lines in this chart: one where the lease specified service as a wet nurse, and another for all others, that is, for service in a household or workshop. The trend is relatively flat for contracts for enslaved women leased as household servants or to serve in a workshop, with a slight upward trend from an average of approximately eight lire per year in 1385 to approximately ten lire per year in the year 1500, an increase of approximately twenty percent over the time period. The data nevertheless suggests a much greater demand for enslaved women to serve as wet nurses, with the yearly amount almost doubling during the same period.

## 5.4 Conditions of exchange in sales and leasing contracts

The exchange of enslaved persons in the Genoese Mediterranean was predicated on notarial contracts that delineated a series of legally enforced mutual obligations. The principals named in these contracts could also specify additional conditions for sales and leases that extended beyond the obligations required by Genoese law. These conditions were added to the *corpus* of the contract through one or more attached clauses. These conditions could apply to both the slaveholders and the enslaved. This section will consider conditions attached to the slaveholders in sales and leasing contracts. The conditions attached to the enslaved will be considered in Chapter 10 although one should also keep in mind that the conditions attached to slaveholders also affected the everyday life of enslaved persons.

### Buying back and return in sales contracts

There were some contracts made under the condition that the enslaved man or woman would either be returned by the purchaser, or purchased back by the seller, within a defined period. These conditions allowed for the easy annulment of contracts in a private manner, without the need to appeal to the state for arbitration. Consider the sale from the summer of 1409 where the merchant Lanzalotto de Lavezola, from the city of Piacenza, sold an enslaved Circassian girl named Margarita to the wool dyer Opizino de Servaricia. The following condition was inserted after confirmation clause, that is, after the clause summarizes the sale and confirms the assent of the principal transactors:

> Enacted in the present instrument... with legally valid stipulations between the aforementioned contracting parties, notwithstanding that should the aforementioned Opizino ... wish to restore the aforementioned slave to the aforementioned Lanzalotto any time within the next year, the aforementioned Lanzalotto solemnly promises and agrees to give and release one hundred and seventy three and one half Genoese lire to the aforementioned Opizino...[[47\]](#_ftn47)

There were no additional requirements attached to this condition, so it seems that Opizino could return Margarita for any reason. He certainly paid for this privilege: the price of 137½ Genoese lire represented a premium of greater than fifty percent over the average price paid for enslaved women during the year 1406.[[48\]](#_ftn48) Another variation of this conditional guarantee is seen in the contract enacted in the summer of 1464 in which the nun Ginevra Macia, treasurer of the monastery of San Sepolcro di Sampierdarena,[[49\]](#_ftn49) sold an enslaved Circassian woman named Maddalena to the nobleman Accelino Spinola. The contract was enacted on 16 June and allowed Accelino “to inspect and take on trial” the enslaved Maddalena until 26 June, upon which she could be returned to sister Ginevra “if she is not pleasing to Accelino”. The contract also stated that should Maddalena die or take flight during this trial period, then the responsibility for her escape or death would fall upon Accelino. A short appendix to the contract, dated 22 June, declared that Maddalena in fact “was not pleasing to Accelino” and therefore the contract was canceled and Maddalena was returned to the monastery. [[50\]](#_ftn50)

This form of guarantee did not only apply to the purchasing party. Certain contracts also allowed for the seller to buy back an enslaved man or woman. In another example involving a religious order enacted during the summer of 1383, the nun Orietta di Negro, the abbess of monastery of San Colombano, located in the commune of Bobbio, sold an enslaved Tatar woman named Catalina to the merchant Sclavolino de Pisa. The sale included the conditional clause that provided Orietta with the right to repurchase Catalina for herself should she decide to return to Genoa in the future.[[51\]](#_ftn51) Sclavolino appeared from his name to be a merchant from Pisa, which raises the question of how sister Orietta would be able to contact him if she should have returned to Genoa. She would have been able, however, to obtain the services of a notary or religious official in Genoa who was familiar with the commercial rhythms of the port in order to make contact if she desired.

### Future payment: sales made as a pledge

Men and women who were slaveholders would sometimes use sales contracts to offer an enslaved man or woman as a pledge for a loan or debt. These so-called ‘sales’ were essentially in the same form as regular sales contracts, except that they included a conditional statement that the enslaved had been pledged for some monetary amount related to an existing debt. The enslaved person, in these cases, essentially served as collateral for a loan for the slaveholder. In the autumn of 1477, for example, the commercial broker Giacomo de Bargalio confessed to receiving a loan from the baker Simone Ferro for 150 Genoese lire. Simone was not present at the enactment and was represented by the notary Antonio de Cairo, who also enacted the contract. He noted that Giacomo

> has solemnly obligated and mortgaged all his goods, both fixed and movable goods, for the present and future, and especially a certain slave of [his] named Margarita, who is Circassian and about thirty-three years of age, and so this slave shall be the security and obligation for Simone and his heirs...[[52\]](#_ftn52)

In this case, there was no mention of a period to repay the debt in order to rescind the pledge. It might have been the case, therefore, that Giacomo intended to permanently give up Margarita for the debt which he had incurred. The key to this example might be that the pledge was made for a debt already owed, and thus it appears that Giacomo was unable to raise the funds in monetary form to repay Simone.

In other cases, there was a future date set for the repayment of the amount owed. In the spring of 1447, for example, the wool shearer Danio de Danio promised to pay the apothecary Gaspare Pizzorno an amount of 40 Genoese lire within one month of the contract. This was for the loan that Danio had taken from Gaspare and for which he had given temporary dominion over an enslaved Tatar woman named Cristina as collateral. This loan was recorded the previous day in a contract enacted by the notary Battista de Vivo (whose contracts have unfortunately been lost). Gaspare promised to return Cristina, and thus cancel the exchange, under the condition that Danio repay the loan within the specified time.[[53\]](#_ftn53)

### The term of lease for enslaved persons

Leasing contracts for enslaved persons generally specified the term of the contract in years appended to the end of the clause that delineated the rights of the receiver. In the autumn of 1457, for example, the recently widowed Nicolosia de Lo Paraso leased out an enslaved Russian named Maria to the Genoese notary Battista Stella for a term of ten years. The contract stated the rights of Battista

> to have, to hold, to enjoy, to possess, to use... for ten years beginning from the twenty-seventh day of March of the current year 1457...[[54\]](#_ftn54)

In this particular contract it seems to be the case that Maria was exchanged several months before the drafting of the actual contract and that the lease began at that point. In most contracts the exchange of an enslaved woman, and thus the term of the lease, began at the time of enactment. In other cases, the exchange of the enslaved man or woman, and thus the term of the lease was to begin at some time in the future. In the spring of 1463, for example, the merchant Giacomo de Mezano leased out an enslaved Russian named Maddalena to the blacksmith Giovanni de Ianoto for a term of nine years. The contract stated that term would begin on the first day of June, one week from the contract’s date.[[55\]](#_ftn55)

In some cases, the receiver would have the option to modify the term of the lease in some way. In the autumn of 1459, the silk merchant Giacomo de Vegetis leased out an enslaved Circassian woman named Catalina to the noblewoman Tobia Pinelli, for a term of three years and total payment of 60 Genoese lire in order to serve as a wet nurse. The contract stated that should Catalina be unable to sufficiently nurse the children of Tobia, then she could be returned to Giacomo and the payment for the remaining period would be refunded.[[56\]](#_ftn56) There are also contracts where the receiver had the option to extend the contract after the end of the term. In the spring of 1458, for example, the merchant Lazzaro de Villanova, represented by his brother Antonio de Villanova who was named as his procurator, leased out an enslaved Tatar woman named Marta to the lawyer Paolo Basadonna for a term of five years. The contract stated that the term had begun about six weeks earlier, which suggests that Maria might have been leased to Paolo on a trial basis or that the lease was informally entered into a personal account in March before being formalized by the notary in April. The lease contained an option that allowed Paolo to extend the contract after the five-year period for the same annual amount that he had been paying. It also mentioned that Maria had already been under lease to Lazzaro by Antonio Lomellini, meaning that this contract was in fact a sub-lease.[[57\]](#_ftn57)

[ image 702011A1.svg ] 

Figure 24: Term of lease (in years) for men and women in leasing contracts for the enslaved. From the dataset of 257 leasing contracts enacted from 1370 to 1500.

Figure 24 illustrates the distribution of term lengths in leasing contracts for enslaved persons. The large spike of contracts for three to four years indicates the increasing prevalence of leasing enslaved women for the purpose of wet nursing, where three years was the most common term.[[58\]](#_ftn58) In contracts where enslaved persons were leased as household servants or to serve in workshops, the average term was approximately eight and a half years.[[59\]](#_ftn59) This was a significant quantity of time that allowed the holder to accumulate a large amount capital on the lease and allowed the receiver to exploit enslaved labour at a lower cost than purchasing an enslaved man or woman.

Figure 25 illustrates the distribution of term lengths in leasing contracts that have a condition of manumission after the end of the term. The term in such contracts was approximately twenty percent longer than terms in contracts which did not obligate the holder to free the enslaved person.[[60\]](#_ftn60) This average longer term reflects the fact that this form of lease was the final lease made by the slaveholder and that profit maximization was one of the primary considerations on their mind when enacting a lease with a promise of future manumission.

[ image 702012A1.svg ]

Figure 25: Distribution of the term of lease for men and women in leasing contracts for the enslaved with an obligation for manumission. From the subset of 62 contracts enacted from 1387 to 1500.

The lengthier terms resulted in the enslaved persons exchanged in leasing contracts being freed when they were well past the age of forty years. In the summer of 1466, for example, the widowed Isolta de Franchi, who was the wife of the deceased merchant Raffaele de Montaldo, leased out an enslaved Circassian woman named Elena to the merchant Marco Giustiniani for a term of seventeen years. The contract contained the condition that Marco would liberate Elena after the term of service. Elena was declared as approximately 25 years of age, which would make her approximately 42 years of age at the time of her manumission.[[61\]](#_ftn61) The widowed Isolta received a payment of 170 Genoese lire for the lease which was about ten percent greater than the sale price for an enslaved woman at that time. Isolta was thus able to use the long-term lease to reap significant financial capital from holding Elena. The sales contract for Elena could not be located in the notarial archives but she would have almost certainly been obtained by the deceased Raffaele for a lesser sum of money, particularly if she had been purchased in the eastern colonies. Having recouped the initial capital for the purchase of Elena meant that Isolta had essentially enjoyed free labour for the length of time that she held Elena within the household. The contract stated that Isolta would retain the right of patronage after the manumission, ensuring that the social activity of Elena would continue to be bound to Isolta.[[62\]](#_ftn62)

### Subletting enslaved persons

The clause delineating the rights of the receiver for leasing contracts for the enslaved implicitly allowed for sub-leasing through the “to profit from the use of,” or more accurately, “to usufruct” phrase. This allowed the receiver the right to profit from the use of the enslaved person. It generally meant that they could profit from their forced labour, but it also allowed the receiver to sub-lease the enslaved person to another individual. The lease by the Venetian merchant Niccolò Barbaro described in Chapter 6 is an example of such a sublease.[[63\]](#_ftn63)

It does not appear that Genoese merchants employed sub-leasing enslaved women as a method for accumulating additional profit. In the dataset of 257 leasing contracts used for this section, the annual amount payable on all subleases was identical to the annual amount payable for the original lease. In an example from the autumn of 1491, the lawyer Raffaele Odone leased out an enslaved Hungarian woman named Maria to the merchant Paolo Sauli for seven years and two and a half months. This was a sub-lease, based upon the original lease to Raffaele by the *nobilis* merchant Niccolò Gentile for seven years and eight months. The price of the original lease was 84 lire 6 soldi 8 denari of Genoese currency, while the price for the sublease was 79 lire 16 soldi 8 denari, which comes out to the same annual amount in both cases.[[64\]](#_ftn64) The three principals were all influential members in Genoese commercial and political society. The *nobiles* merchant Niccolò Gentile was active in the Iberian Peninsula where the Gentile albergo operated a commercial company with branches in Valencia and Granada in which Niccolò had worked as an agent.[[65\]](#_ftn65) The initial lease, which was rather long in duration, likely reflects an expected extended absence during the latter half of the decade, and it is indeed during this time that he was attested in various parts of Iberia. In the early part of the decade, however, he was in Genoa and was serving on the *Consilium* *antianorum* and other political offices at the time of the initial lease.[[66\]](#_ftn66) The lawyer Raffaele Odone was from an influential *mercantes* family and was quite active in the diplomatic sphere. In 1478 and 1481 he served as the Genoese ambassador on diplomatic missions to the papacy and in 1484 as an ambassador to Milan.[[67\]](#_ftn67) He was also involved in colonial administration for the Casa di San Giorgio, serving as the commissioner to Corsica in 1487.[[68\]](#_ftn68) The third principal figure, Paolo Sauli, was from another influential *mercantes* family and served on the *Consilium* *antianorum* in 1489 and 1490, around the same time as Niccolò and Raffaele were active in the local civic administration.[[69\]](#_ftn69) The continuous presence of the three principal figures in the original lease and the sub-lease in the administrative and financial organizations of governance around the time of the enactment suggests that the contracts might be, in part, a series of reciprocal favours for persons who were frequently absent from the city proper. This hypothesis is given additional weight from the documentary evidence which shows that while slaveholders did not lose financial capital in the act of subleasing, they did not gain any either.

In order to maintain a greater degree of social control over their enslaved persons, lenders sometimes added a condition that forbade subletting by the receiver. The lease of an enslaved Russian named Caterina by the cloth merchant Girolamo Calvo also contained an obligation that Caterina could not be subleased during the contract without the express permission of Girolamo under the penalty of 40 Florins.[[70\]](#_ftn70) In another example from the summer of 1475 the nobleman Oberto Interiano leased out an enslaved Abkhazan named Lazzarino to another nobleman Niccolò Spinola for a term of eleven years. The contract specified that Lazzarino could not be sub-leased during the duration of the contract. The contract also obligated Niccolò to provide food, clothes, and shoes for Lazzarino, whether he was healthy or ill, for the duration of the lease, and that, at the end of the term, he must be returned in good health and without any illness.[[71\]](#_ftn71) In third contract from the spring of 1474 the merchant Giovanni de Stanchino, from the commune of Moneglia, leased out an enslaved Hungarian named Melica to the merchant Pietro Ambrogio Carrega for a term of fifteen years. The contract specified that Pietro Ambrogio was forbidden to sublet Melica to the heirs of the deceased Battista de Franchi, or to a certain Filippo de Caneto, at any point during the term of the lease.[[72\]](#_ftn72) The notary did not specify any justification for this restriction, as usual, and it is difficult to determine whether it was Melica or the holder Giovanni who had problems with the aforementioned persons or their extended families. The issue was, however, severe enough for Giovanni to include the clause that served to keep her away from these individuals.

**

The market economy of slavery in the late medieval Genoese Mediterranean was a consistently dynamic and adaptive market that was able to quickly react to the vicissitudes of supply. It was an emerging monetary market yet still rooted in premodern exchange practices. The political situation of the fifteenth century Mediterranean did not affect the capitalization of the market economy of slavery: an analysis of prices and the quantity of exchanges demonstrated that it continued to grow after the collapse of the Black Sea colonies. This chapter also demonstrates how the shifting of slaving zones was concurrent with the development and proliferation of new financial instruments—particularly insurance and leasing—as additional means to extract profits from the enslaved.

------

[[1\]](#_ftnref1) Domenico Gioffrè, *Il mercato degli schiavi a Genova nel secolo XV* (Genova: Fratelli Bozzi, 1971), pp. 128–38; Charles Verlinden, *L’esclavage dans l’Europe médiévale.* *Tome II: Italie, colonies Italiennes du Levant, Levant Latin* (Brügge: De Tempel, 1977), pp. 427–529.

[[2\]](#_ftnref2) Hannah Barker, *That Most Precious Merchandise: The Mediterranean Trade in Black Sea Slaves, 1260–1500* (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2019), pp. 104–12.

[[3\]](#_ftnref3) Some central works for Genoa and the wider Mediterranean are Giuseppe Felloni, *Scritti di storia economica* (Genova: Società ligure di storia patria, 1998); Carlo Cipolla, *The Monetary Policy of Fourteenth-Century Florence* (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1982); Frederic Lane and Reinhold Mueller, *Money and Banking in Medieval and Renaissance Venice* (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1985). A comprehensive and approachable survey is provided by Peter Spufford, *Money and Its Use in Medieval Europe* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1988).

[[4\]](#_ftnref4) Carlo Cipolla, *Money, Prices, and Civilization in the Mediterranean World: Fifth to Seventeenth Century* (Princeton University Press, 1956), pp. 38–51.

[[5\]](#_ftnref5) Spufford, *Money and Its Use in Medieval Europe*, p. 322. The Florentine coin was commonly called the Florin.

[[6\]](#_ftnref6) Ubaldo Meroni, ed., *Declarationes valoris monetarum per officiales officii monetarum civitatis Januae sedentes in Cecha pro tibunali ad bancum iuris* (Mantova: Zecca di Genova, 1953), pp. 3–4.

[[7\]](#_ftnref7) ASGe, Notai antichi 897, Tommaso Duracino, filza 10, nr. 509, dated 1467-07-28, where “Andreas de Spigno civis Ianue quondam Iohannis... vendidit et titulo vendicionis dedit et consignavit ut aserit … notario infrascripto tanquam persone publice officio publico presenti stipulanti et recipienti Blanchinete filie quondam Iohannis Ususmaris et uxor quondam Domenici de Marinis et pro me dicto notario infracripto de Blachinete licet absenti quandam sclavam dicti Andree nominatam Maria de progenie Rubeorum ectatis annorum viginti quatuor vel circa... pro pretio et finito pretio librarum duocentarum Ianuinorum monete curentis quas dictus Andreas confessus est mihi dicto notario ut supra stipulanti et recipienti sive persone dicte Blanchete licet absenti habuisse et recepisse a Raphaele de Marinis Baldasaris...”; on Domenico and Raffaele de Marini see ASCGe, Manoscritti 54, Famiglie genovesi, fols. 126v–127v.

[[8\]](#_ftnref8) ASGe, Notai antichi 842, Giuliano Canella, register 5, 1415-1417, fols. 2v–3r, dated 1415-09-12, where “Cataneus de Dernixio civis Ianue vendidit et vendicionis titulo dedit et traddidit Badasali Spinule quondam Luciani civi Ianue... sclavum unum ipsius Catanei de Dernixio de progenie Bulgarorum nomine Lancarotum de etatis annorum sexdecem vel circa... pro precio et finitio precio librarum nonagintanovem Ianuinorum quod precium habuisse dixit et confessus est dictus Cataneus venditor et recepit a dicto emptori scilicet libras vigintiquatuor Ianuinorum in banco Nicolai Lomelini et residuum et complementum in banco Gaspalis de Vivaldis...”

[[9\]](#_ftnref9) ASGe, Notai antichi 911, Tommaso Duracino, filza 24, series II, nr. 64, dated 1483-02-13, where “Bernardinus de Gaudeno de Novarra scriba galeate serenissimi regis Ferdinandi per Antonius Cepula de Neapoli presentialiter in portu Ianue existentis nomine et vice dicti Antonii Cepula et pro quo Antonio ipse Bernardinus suo proprio et privato nomine... vendidit et titulo et ex causa vendicionis dedit tradidit et consignavit Antonio de Sale civi Ianue quondam Antonii... quendam sclavum dicti Antonii nominatum Elia de progenie Turchorum etatis annorum viginti duorum vel circa.. pro precio et finito precio ducatorum triginta auri in auro largorum boni auri et iusti ponderis quos dictus Bernardinus dicto nomine confessus fuit habuisse et recepisse ab ipso Antonio...”

[[10\]](#_ftnref10) See the analysis in Chapter 6 for an analysis of foreign merchants in the Genoese market of slavery.

[[11\]](#_ftnref11) ASGe, Notai antichi 910, Tommaso Duracino, filza 23, series II, nr. 49, dated 1481-01-26 where “Martinus de Coronato habitator Sancti Postestacie Vultriis Laurentii maior annis triginta... vendidit... dedit tradidit et consignavit Bartholomeo Palmario civi Ianue quondam Dominici... quandam sclavam dicti Martini nominatum Petrus de progenie Albanesium ectatis annorum decem et septem vel circa... ad annos octo proxime venturos... pro precio et finito precio ducatorum duodecim auri et in auro largorum boni auri...”

[[12\]](#_ftnref12) Fernand Braudel, *Civilization and Capitalism, 15th–18th Century. Volume I: The Structures of Everyday Life* (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1981), pp. 444–5.

[[13\]](#_ftnref13) ASGe, San Giorgio 5136, Bancorum Sancti Georgii 1408, fol. 1r: “...banchum sub prefatis millesimo et die tenere incoarunt quatenus debita Communis redigantur ad nichilum et prave nonnulle consuetudines bancheriorum resechentur que incomoda non modica reipublice irrogant cum sint sic propriis dediti quod publica vastare minime erubescunt et monetam non debito precio sed insueto et irracionabili spenderi et retineri consentiunt.” The eight individuals were Antonio Giustiniani, Luciano Spinola, Cosmo Tarigo, Battista Lomellini, Raffaele Vivaldi, Rabella Grimaldi, Giovanni Nairone, and Carlo Ciconia. Half of the men were from *nobiles* families and half popolares families.

[[14\]](#_ftnref14) For an overview of the deposit bank division, see Giuseppe Felloni, “I primi banchi pubblici della Casa di San Giorgio (1408–43),” in *Banchi pubblici, banchi privati e monti di pietà nell’Europa preindustriale* *: amministrazione, tecniche operative e ruoli economici* (Genova: Società ligure di storia patria, 1991), pp. 223–46; Carlo Taviani, *The Making of the Modern Corporation: The Casa di San Giorgio and Its Legacy* (London: Routledge, 2022), p. 47.

[[15\]](#_ftnref15) Heinrich Sieveking, *Studio delle finanze genovesi nel Medioevo e in particolare sulla Casa di S. Giorgio.* Tomo II, trans. Onorio Soardi (Genova: Società ligure di storia patria, 1907), pp. 15–22.

[[16\]](#_ftnref16) Giuseppe Felloni, ed., *Inventario dell’archivio del Banco di San Giorgio: 1407–1805. Tomo II/1: Affari generali* (Roma: Ministero per i beni culturali e ambientali, 1990), pp. 65–6. The bureaucracy of the Casa di San Giorgio is made more confusing by the interchangeable manner by which many historians apply the terms Ufficio, Compere, Banco, and Casa when writing about the institution, as well as the terms *procuratores* and *protectores* when writing about the administrators. My analysis will primarily focus on the institution in its entirety and use the terms Casa for the institution and *procuratores* for its administrators.

[[17\]](#_ftnref17) Giuseppe Felloni, “Niccolò Lomellini: un banchiere genovese degli Alberti,” in *La vita e il mondo di Leon Battista Alberti* (Firenze: Leo S. Olschki, 2008), pp. 219–23.

[[18\]](#_ftnref18) ASGe, Notai antichi 482, Giuliano Canella, register 5, 1415–1417, fols. 2v–3r, entry dated 1415-09-12, where “Cataneus de Dernixio civis Ianue vendidit et vendicionis titulo dedit et traddidit Badasali Spinule quondam Luciani civi Ianue presenti ementi etiam habuisse confitenti sclavum unum ipsius Catanei de Dernixio de progenie Bulgarorum nomine Lancarotum de etatis annorum sexdecem vel circa... pro precio et finitio precio librarum nonagintanovem Ianuinorum quod precium habuisse dixit et confessus est dictus Cataneus venditor et recepit a dicto emptori scilicet libras vigintiquatuor Ianuinorum in banco Nicolai Lomelini...”

[[19\]](#_ftnref19) Felloni, “Niccolò Lomellini: un banchiere genovese degli Alberti,” p. 229.

[[20\]](#_ftnref20) Robert Lopez and Irving Raymond, eds., *Medieval Trade in the Mediterranean World. Illustrative Documents Translated with Introductions and Notes* (New York: Columbia University Press, 1961), pp. 157–9.

[[21\]](#_ftnref21) ASGe, Notai antichi 903, Tommaso Duracino, filza 16, nr. 166 (formerly nr. 168), dated 1473-02-21 where “Egidius Sacherius notarius civis Ianue quondam Michaelis tanquam procurator et procuratorio nomine Antognete filie quondam Iohannis Robelli de Varagine et uxor Luce Bertholoni quondam Nicolai... vendidit et titulo vendicionis dedit cessit et tradidit et mandavit nobili Ieronimo Calvo etiam civi Ianue quondam Michaelis... quandam sclavam dicte Antognete nominatam Lucia de progenie Iharchasiorum ectatis annorum triginta octo vel circa... ad annos tresdecim proxime venturos... pro pretio et finito pretio pro dictis annis tresdecim dictorum trium comperarum Sancti Georgii...”; for the approximate value of the 48 Genoese lire per *locum* see ASGe, San Giorgio 38215, Lapidum 1467–1480, entry dated 1473-02-11; see also Jacques Heers, *Gênes au XVe siècle.* *Activités économiques et problèmes sociaux* (Paris: S.E.V.P.E.N., 1961), p. 627.

[[22\]](#_ftnref22) Antonio Gallo, *Commentarius de Genuensium maritima classe in Barchinonenses expedita anno MCCCCLXVI*, ed. Clara Fossati (Roma: Istituto storico italiano per il Medio Evo, 2010), pp. 12–16, 45–7.

[[23\]](#_ftnref23) ASCGe, Manoscritti 54, Famiglie genovesi, fol. 8v, where “Geronimo nobilis Guelfo 1460: capitano d’una nave contra Catalani 1466 come in Antonio Gallo C4 B item 1467... officiale della Camera 1474... officiale di mercanzia 1477... sua figlia Battestina moglie di Francesco Segno 1481... in compera Sancti Georgii...”

[[24\]](#_ftnref24) ASCGe, Manoscritti 52, Famiglie popolari genovesi, fol. 570r.

[[25\]](#_ftnref25) ASCGe, Manoscritti 16, Famiglie di Genova antiche e moderne. Tomo I, parte II. Lettera B, fols. 193r, 198r.

[[26\]](#_ftnref26) ASGe, Notai antichi 915, Tommaso Duracino, filza 29, series II, nr. 81, dated 1494-04-18, where “Ieronimus de Furnaiis civis Ianue Baliani... vendidit... dedit cessit tradidit et consignavit Stefano de Frevante notaio quondam Petri... quandam ipsius Ieronimi sclavam nominatam Margarita de progenie Bossinorum etatis annorum viginti vel circa... pro precio et finito precio librarum trecentarum trigintaquinque... in pagarum locorum comperarum Sancti Georgi anni de MCCCCLXXXXI...”.

[[27\]](#_ftnref27) ASGe, San Giorgio 2624, Floreni pagarum 1478–80, fol. 1r: “scriptum manu mei Petri de Frevante notarii scribe deputati per magnificum Officium Sancti Georgii anni presentis de MCCCCLXVII.”

[[28\]](#_ftnref28) ASGe, Notai antichi 1174, Giovanni de Benedetti, filza 6, nr. 674, dated 1500-02-21, where “nobilis Baldasar de Nigrono civis Ianue quondam Simonis vendidit et titulo et ex causa venditionis dedit cessit tradidit et consignavit Iohanni Baptiste de Fatio seaterio Raphaelis... quamdam sclavam dicti Baldasaris vocatam Blanche de progenie Maurorum etatis annorum sexdecim in circa... pro precio et nomine precii parmorum centum sexaginta veluti negri dupli...”

[[29\]](#_ftnref29) Ronald Zupko, *Italian Weights and Measures from the Middle Ages to the Nineteenth Century* (Philadelphia: American Philosophical Society, 1981), pp. 183–5.

[[30\]](#_ftnref30) ASGe, Notai antichi 895, Tommaso Duracino, filza 8, nr. 539, dated 1465-10-03, where “Iohannes de Morello barberius quondam Antonii... vendidit et titulo et ex causa vendicionis dedit et consignavit usque anno presenti de mensis februarii Iohanni Fontecoberte civi et mercatori Maioricarum Ianue commoranti... quandam sclavam dicti Iohannis nominatam Elena de progenie Zichorum ectatis annorum triginta duorum vel circa pro precio et finito precio librarum centum viginti septem Ianue monete currentis... in tanto quantitate in tanto quantiate lanarum Maioricarorum...”

[[31\]](#_ftnref31) ASGe, Notai antichi 891, Tommaso Duracino, filza 4, nr. 317, dated 1459-06-16, where “Franciscus de Enisa civis et mercatori Valentie Ianue commorans sciens et cognoscens... emisse et titulo emptionis acquisvisse a Iohani de Abatii civi Ianue quondam Domenici quamdam sclavam nominatam Caterina de progenie Zichorum ectatis annorum viginti quatuor vel circa... precio librarum centum viginti Ianuinorum monete curentis quas dictus Iohannes habuit et recepit et habuisse et recepisse confessus fuit ab ipso Francesco in hunc modum videlicet libras octuaginta novem et soldorum octo Ianuinorum in tanta quantitate pannorum… diversorum colorem et libras triginta et soldorum duodecim Ianuinorum in peccuniam numerata...”

[[32\]](#_ftnref32) ASGe, Notai antichi 674,Cristoforo de Rapallo, filza 4, nr. 479, dated 1446-07-23, where “Bernabas Taiavacha de Buzala quondam Georgii pensionavit et locavit Nicolao Muso civi Saone quondam Manezardi... quandam servam ipsius Bernabovis nomine Maria de progenie Rubeorum etatis annorum XXXV vel circa hinc ad annos septem cum dimidio proxime venturis pro precio librarum quandraginta Ianue quas dictus Bernabas a dicto Nicolao habuisse et recepisse fuit confessus in peccunia numerata et aliis rebus...”

[[33\]](#_ftnref33) ASGe, Notai antichi 1029, Niccolò Raggi, filza 17, nr. 631, dated 1487-08-23, see description in Gioffrè, *Il mercato degli schiavi a Genova nel secolo XV*, p. 325.

[[34\]](#_ftnref34) ASGe, Notai antichi 1022, Niccolò Raggi, filza 6, nr. 32, dated 1474-01-11, an apprenticeship contract where he was named as “Gulielmus Maida Baptiste de Insulabona...”

[[35\]](#_ftnref35) See the discussion and analysis in Chapter 11 for details.

[[36\]](#_ftnref36) See the discussion and analysis on this phenomenon in Chapter 7.

[[37\]](#_ftnref37) Steven Epstein, *Speaking of Slavery: Color, Ethnicity, and Human Bondage in Italy* (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 2001), p. 181.

[[38\]](#_ftnref38) ASGe, Notai antichi 482, Giuliano Canella, register 5, 1415–1417, fols. 2v–3r, dated 1415-09-12, where “Cataneus de Dernixio civis Ianue vendidit et vendicionis titulo dedit et traddidit Badasali Spinule quondam Luciani civi Ianue presenti ementi etiam habuisse confitenti sclavum unum ipsius Catanei de Dernixio de progenie Bulgarorum nomine Lancarotum de etatis annorum sexdecem vel circa sanum de persona sua usque hodie et ab inde antea secundum consuetudinem vendicionis sclavorum et sclavarum in civitate Ianue...”

[[39\]](#_ftnref39) The price is specified as a quantity of Genoese lire in 552 of 632 recorded sales contracts.

[[40\]](#_ftnref40) Sally McKee, “The Implications of Slave Women’s Sexual Service in Late Medieval Italy,” in *Unfreie Arbeit: Ökonomische Und Kulturgeschichtliche Perspektiven*, ed. Mustafa Erdem Kabadayi and Tobias Reichardt (Hildesheim: Georg Olms, 2007), p. 103.

[[41\]](#_ftnref41) See the discussion and analysis beginning on page 276.

[[42\]](#_ftnref42) Geoffrey Hodgson, “On the Limits of Rational Choice Theory,” *Economic Thought* 1 (2012), pp. 94–108, provides a succinct overview and points to the relevant critical literature, most of which is beyond the scope of this study but which provides a useful corrective to some historians imposing modern notions of economic efficiency and rational choice theory back to the premodern era.

[[43\]](#_ftnref43) Meroni, *Declarationes valoris monetarum per officiales officii monetarum civitatis Januae*, pp. 3–4.

[[44\]](#_ftnref44) Rossana Urbani and Guido Zazzu, *The Jews in Genoa* (Leiden: Brill Academic Publishers, 1999), p. xxxiv. The reading of contracts identified as the sale of enslaved Jewish persons reveals them to be temporary sales or leasing contracts. I will need to do more archival work here on locating and analyzing these contracts.

[[45\]](#_ftnref45) ASGe, Notai antichi 1257, Cosimo de Abbati, filza 1, unnumbered item dated 1494-06-04, in which the enslaved Caterina “olim Iudea” is sold to Raffaele Lomellini for 10 Genoese ducats; see description in Guido Zazzu, *Sepharad addio: 1492, i profughi ebrei dalla Spagna al ghetto di Genova* (Genova: Marietti, 1991), p. 133.

[[46\]](#_ftnref46) The vast majority of leasing contracts were for the leases of enslaved women. There was not a sufficient number leases of men to determine any long term price trends.

[[47\]](#_ftnref47) ASGe, Notai antichi 844, Costantino de Albertis, filza 1, series I, nr. 159, dated 1447-09-04, with the stated condition “acto in presenti instrumento... solemni stipulacione valato inter dictos contrahentes predictis non obstantibus quod dictus Opicinus... quandocumque voluerit in annum unum proxime venturum restituere dictam sclavam dicto Lanzaloto et ipso restitente dictam sclavam dictus Lazalotus proxmixit et solempniter convenit dicto Opecino dare et solvere dictas libras centum triginta septem cum dimidio Ianuinorum precii predicti...”

[[48\]](#_ftnref48) The average price of an enslaved woman in sales contracts enacted in the year 1406 was 91 Genoese lire.

[[49\]](#_ftnref49) On the monastery of Santo Sepolcro di Sampierdarena, see Adriano Cuneo, *Il Palazzo del Monastero in Sampierdarena* (Sampierdarena: Federico Reale, 1912), pp. 5–29. The monastery was suppressed by Pope Leo X in 1514 and the structure demolished in 1912. A post office now stands in its place.

[[50\]](#_ftnref50) ASGe, Notai antichi 861, Lazzaro Raggi, filza 9, nr. 295, dated 1464-06-16, where “soror Genebra Macia monialis in monasterio Sancti Sepulcri de Sancte Petro Arene ac thegaureria dicti monasterii vendidit dedit et tradidit ac consignavit iure proprio et in perpetuum Acelino Spinule de Luculo domini Ieronimi... quamdam ipsius sororis Genebre seu dicti monasterii sclavam nomine Magdalena de progenie Iharchasiorum etatis annorum XVIII vel circa... quod liceat dicto Acelino probare seu experiri dictam Margaritam usque ad dictam diem vigesimam sextam presentis mensis, que si sibi non placeret liceat eidem Acelino illam restituere eidem sorori Genebre et discedere a presenti vendicioine, nichilominus risicum dicte sclave mortis et fuge sit per dictum...” See the edition in Luigi Tria, *La schiavitù in Liguria: ricerche e documenti* (Genova: Società ligure di storia patria, 1947), doc. 68, pp. 199–200, which incorrectly transcribes the name of the slaveholder as “Ginevra Maria”.

[[51\]](#_ftnref51) ASGe, Notai antichi 409, Guirardo Parisola, register 3, 1382–1383, fol. 242v, entry dated 1383-08-14, where “soror Orieta de Nigro abbatissa monasterii sancti Columbani vendidit cessit et traddidit Schlavolino de Pixis quondam Puchareli de Pixis sclavam vocatam Catalina de progenie Tartarorum etatis annorum viginti quatuor vel circa... sub tali pacti et condicione videlicet quod si contingerit de cetero dictam Catalinam venire ad civitatem Ianue et ipsam dominam sororem Oriteam ipsam recuperari posse quod ipsam sclavam ipsa domina soror Orieta accipore possit pro sua et tanquam suam sua propria autoritate, sine autoritate alicuius officii vel magistratus...”

[[52\]](#_ftnref52) ASGe, Notai antichi 812, Andrea de Cairo, filza 32, series II, nr. 74, dated 1477-09-01, where “Iacobo de Bargalio quondam Ambroxii civis Ianue... confessus fuit et in vertiate publice recognovit michi notario infrascipto tamquam public persone officio publico... Simone Ferri formairii in Ianua in contracta Porte Sancti Andree ac... eidem Simoni dare et solvere et teneri libras centum quinquaginta Ianuinorum... solemniter obligavit and ipothechavit omnia et singula bona ipsius Iacobi mobila et immobilia presentia et futura et specialiter quamdam sclavam ipsius Iacobi vocatam Margaritam de progenie Zichorum etatis annorum triginta trium vel circa ita quad dicta sclava sit special pignus et specialis obligatio dicti Simonis et dictorum heredum...”; edition in Tria, *La schiavitù in Liguria*, doc. 71, pp. 203–4.

[[53\]](#_ftnref53) ASGe, Notai antichi 694, Benedetto Pilozio, filza 1, nr. 117, dated 1447-04-18, where “Danius de Daniis scurator pannorum sciens Gasparem Pizurnum speciarium pignorasse ab ipso Danio quamdam eius sclavam nomine Cristianam de progenie Tartarorum quantum pro libris quadraginta ianuinorum sortis nomine et pro libra una et soldis decem expensarum...”; edition in Tria, *La schiavitù in Liguria*, doc. 51, pp. 182–3.

[[54\]](#_ftnref54) ASGe, Notai antichi 890, Tommaso Duracino, filza 3, series I, nr. 297, dated 1457-11-09, where “Nicolosia filia quondam Antonio de lo Paraxio et uxor quondam Antonii de Campomorono locavit et titulo locacionis concessit et concedit Baptiste Stelle notario...quandam sclavam dicte Nicolosie nominatam Maria de progenie Rubeorum ectatis annorum triginta duorum vel circa... ad habendum tenendum gaudendum possidendum et usufructuandum locacionis titulo ut supra per et usque ad annos decem proxime venturos inceptos usque die XXVIIª mensis marcii anni presentis de M°CCCCLVII°...”

[[55\]](#_ftnref55) ASGe, Notai antichi 894, Tommaso Duracino, filza 7, series I, nr. 103, dated 1463-05-25, where “Iacobus de Mezano civis Ianue quondam Iohannis locavit et titulo locationis dedit et concessit Iohanni de Ianoto fabro Manuele... quandam sclavam dicti Iacobi nominatam Magdalenam de progenie Rubeorum ectatis annorum triginta vel circa... ad annos novem proxime venturos incipendos die prima iunii proxime venturos anni presentis de MCCCCLXIII...”

[[56\]](#_ftnref56) ASGe, Notai antichi 856, Lazzaro Raggi, filza 4, series II, nr. 355, dated 1459-11-08, where “Vietus de Carmagnola filator septe quondam Filipi... locavit et titulo locationis concessit nobili Tobie Pinello... quandam dicti Vieti sclavam nomine Catalina de progenie Zichorum etatis annorum XXIII vel circa cum lacte... ad annos tres et tunc proxime secuturos pro prensione et nomine pensionis librarum sexaginta Ianuinorum monete currentis... et propterea Iacobus de Vigetis seatarius sciens in rei veritatem dictam sclavam esse suam ut idem Vietus hic presens fatetur...”

[[57\]](#_ftnref57) ASGe, Notai antichi 890, Tommaso Duracino, filza 3, series II, nr. 136, dated 1458-04-06, where “Antonio de Vilanova quondam Francesco tanquam procurator et procuratorio nomine ut aservit Lazari de Vilanova eius fratris... locavit et titulo locacionis dedit et concessit domino Paulo Baxadone legum doctori... quandam sclavam dicti Lazari fratris sui nominatam Marta de progenie Tartarorum ectatis annorum triginta vel circa... ad annos quinque proxime venturos inceptos usquem die XXI mensis februarii anni presentis de M°CCCCLVIII... quod finitis dictis annis quinque presentis locationis si dictus dominus Paulus voluerit et ellegerit velle conducere dictam Martam sclavam dicto titulo locationis ad ratam predictam... quo dictus Lazarus dictam sclavam acquisivit ab Antonio Lomelino ad ratam predictam sibi locare...”

[[58\]](#_ftnref58) See Chapter 11 for a detailed analysis of the exploitation of enslaved women as wet nurses.

[[59\]](#_ftnref59) The median term for contracts where nursing was not a requirement was 8.43 years.

[[60\]](#_ftnref60) This calculation is based on a median term of 10.23 years for contracts that obligated manumission versus a median term of 8.43 years for contracts that did not. The latter number ignores the small set of contracts where leasing was made for the purposes of wet-nursing, which were generally much shorter (with a median term of 3.38 years) and which would improperly skew the data.

[[61\]](#_ftnref61) ASGe, Notai antichi 896, Tommaso Duracino, filza 9, nr. 409, dated 1466-08-01, where “Iohannis de Franchis Luxardi et uxor quondam spectabilis domini Raffaelis de Montaldo... locavit et titulo et ex causa locationis concessit et concedit Marcho Iustiniano civi Ianue quondam domini Baptiste... quandam sclavam dicte Isolde nominatam Elena de progenie Zichorum ectatis annorum viginti quinque vel circa talem qualem est...ad annos decem septem proxime venturos inceptos usque die sexta Ianuarii anni de MCCCCLXV quo tempore dicta Isolda traddidit et consignavit dicto Marco idem dicta sclava...”

[[62\]](#_ftnref62) This form of manumission—in which the former slaveholder retains the right of patronage—will be discussed in greater detail in Chapter 14.

[[63\]](#_ftnref63) See the description and analysis on page 158 of Chapter 6 for additional details.

[[64\]](#_ftnref64) ASGe, Notai antichi 1294, Antonio Pastorino, filza 5, nr. 524, dated 1491-10-12, see description in Gioffrè, *Il mercato degli schiavi a Genova nel secolo XV*, p. 311.

[[65\]](#_ftnref65) Raúl González Arévalo, “En el surco intrabético. Genoveses en Guadix tras la conquista cristiana (ca. 1490–1510),” *eHumanista: Journal of Iberian Studies* 38, no. 1 (2018), pp. 207–8; on the business activities of the Gentile family in Valencia, see David Igual Luis, “Valencia y Sevilla en el sistema económico genovés de finales del siglo XV,” *Revista* d’historia *medieval* 3 (1992), pp. 106–12.

[[66\]](#_ftnref66) ASCGe, Manoscritti 26, Origine e fasti delle nobili famiglie di Genova, fol. 491r, where “1491: Nicolo Gentili furonno Antiani di Genova...”; ASCGe, Manoscritti 54, Famiglie genovesi, fol. 78r, where “Nicolò olim Pallavicino officiale di Camera 1477… di Moneta 1479… dispenza grani 1489 sia 1487… in focagi 1489...”

[[67\]](#_ftnref67) ASGe, Archivio segreto 1804, Litterarum registri 1481, entries dated 1481-01-25 and 1481-02-25; see description in Giacomo Grasso, ed., *Documenti riguardanti la costituzione di una lega contro il Turco nel 1481* (Genova: Istituto Sordo-Muti, 1880), p. 24; see also Danuta Quirini-Poplawska, “Attempts at Forging a Genoese-Polish-Tatar Alliance against the Ottoman Empire in 1480–1484,” in *From* Pax Mongolica *to* Pax Ottomanica*: War, Religion and Trade in the Northwestern Black Sea Region (14th–16th Centuries)*, ed. Ovidiu Cristea and Liviu Pilat (Leiden: Brill Academic Publishers, 2020), p. 177.

[[68\]](#_ftnref68) ASGe, San Giorgio 2781, Primi cancellieri, busta 8, 1480–1499, item dated 1487-11-10, among others; see also Francis Molard, “Les archives de la Banque de Saint-George. Partie II,” *Études Corse* 26 (1960), p. 42; Id., “Les archives de la Banque de Saint-George. Partie VIII,” *Corse historique* 2, no. 8 (1962), p. 51; Flavia Perasso, “Genova e la Corsica nella II metà del Quattrocento,” in *Genova, la Liguria e l’oltremare tra Medioevo ed età moderna: studi e ricerche d’archivio. Tomo I*, ed. Raffaele Belvederi (Genova: Fratelli Bozzi, 1974), p. 53; Id., “Corsica genovese tra medioevo ed età moderna,” in *Genova, la Liguria e l’oltremare tra Medioevo ed età moderna: studi e ricerche d’archivio. Tomo II*, ed. Raffaele Belvederi (Genova: Fratelli Bozzi, 1976), pp. 224–5.

[[69\]](#_ftnref69) ASCGe, Manoscritti 26, Origine e fasti delle nobili famiglie di Genova, fol. 970v, which notes “1489, 90, 97, 1500, 502, 506, e 8 Paolo Saoli quondam Bartolomeo quondam Pasqualetto fu antiano della Repubblica...”; see also ASCGe, Manoscritti 54, Famiglie genovesi, fol. 197v, which notes “Paulo… quondam Bartholomei… anziano 1489 revisor anziano 1492, 94…”

[[70\]](#_ftnref70) ASGe, Notai antichi 891, Tommaso Duracino, filza 4, nr. 416, dated 1459-08-06, where “Ieronimus Calvus draperius civis Ianue quondam Iacobi... locavit et titulo locationis concessit et concedit Paulo de Promentorio civi Ianue quondam Bartholomei... quandam sclavam dicti Ieronimi nominatam Caterina de progenie Rubeorum ectatis annorum decem octo vel circa... ad annos duos proxime venturos... quod dictus Paulus non possit seu valeat dictam Caterinam pensionare seu locare vel permutare et alicui persone nisi de expressa licentia et voluntate dicti Ieronimi durante dicte tempore sub pena florenorum quinquaginta Ianuinorum solemni stipulatione promissa in quam penam incidat dictus Paulus idem Ieronimo aplicanda ipsi Ieronimi per iusto damno et interesse dicti Ieronimi...”.

[[71\]](#_ftnref71) ASGe, Notai antichi 905, Tommaso Duracino, filza 18, nr. 601 (formerly nr. 502), dated 1475-09-15, where “Obertus Italianus civis Ianue quondam Iuliani vendidit... dedit cessit tradidit et consignavit Nicolao Spinula civi Ianue Brunoris... quendam sclavum dicti Oberti nominatum Lazarinus de progenie Avogaxiorum sive cuiusvis alterius progeniei existat ectatis annorum decem octo vel circa... ad annos undecim proxime venturos tantum non ultra ac vendendum et alienandum pro toto dicto tempore dictorum annorum undecim...”

[[72\]](#_ftnref72) ASGe, Notai antichi 904, Tommaso Duracino, filza 17, nr. 199, dated 1474-03-19, where “Iohannes de Stachino de Monelia quondam Nicolai vendidit... dedit tradidit et consignavit Petro Ambrosio Carrege civi Ianue quondam Iohannis... quandam sclavam dicti Iohannis nomintam Melicha de progenie Ungarorum ectatis annorum triginta vel circa... ad annos quindecim proxime venturos inceptos usque dictam die prima dicti mensis decembris dicti anni proxime presenti... dictus Petrus Ambrosius heredes et successores sui non possit seu possint durantibus dictis annis conducenti dictam Melicham vendere seu locare nec vendi seu locari facere heredibus quondam Baptiste de Franchi de Prianis fratribus nec Philippo de Caneto...”